
--- Page 1 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith

--- Page 3 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
3nd Revised Edition
Imam an-Nawawi
Translated by
Abdassamad Clarke

--- Page 4 ---
Copyright © Abdassamad Clarke 1998
First published in Muharram 1419 AH/May 1998 CE
2nd edition Muharram 1421 AH/April 2000 CE
3rd edition Ramadan 1429 AH/September 2008 CE
by
Ta-Ha Publishers Ltd.
1 Wynne Road
London SW9 0BB
Web site: http://www.taha.co.uk
Email: sales@taha.co.uk
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in any retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without written permission of the
publishers.
By: Imam an-Nawawi
General Editor: Afsar Siddiqui
Translated by: Abdassamad Clarke
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
The Complete Forty Hadith
1. An-Nawawi, Imam
ISBN 1897940 74 2
Layout by: Bookwright:
Web site: http://www.bogvaerker.dk/Bookwright
Email: bookwright@bogvaerker.dk
Printed and bound by:

--- Page 5 ---
Acknowledgements
I gratefully acknowledge the help of two scholars: Dr. Yasin
Dutton of Edinburgh University, and Shaykh Ali Laraki both
of whom gave generously of their time and knowledge, and
unravelled several seemingly intractable problems. My thanks
also to Imam Yahya Muhammad al-Hussein of Dublin for help in
one particularly obstinate passage. However, since I was unable
to show the complete typescript to any of the above the mistakes
are mine, and the praise for its merits belongs to Allah.

--- Page 6 ---
vvii

--- Page 7 ---
Preface to the First Edition
This translation was prepared from two editions: the first
edited and annotated by Abdullah Ibrahim al-Ansari,
and published by Maktabah Jiddah, the second edition
from Maktabah al-Qudsi in Cairo.
The original intention of the Imam was to put these hadith and
his explanatory text in front of the Muslims in a way which would
be useful to them, and so for that reason we have attempted to
keep this translation accurate but not academic. To that end I
have not used the Arabic script at all except in two or three places
in which the Imam explains Arabic words and where phonetics
became more complicated than the Arabic.
As to the footnotes on the sources of the ayat and the hadith
and for biographies of the Companions, I have largely drawn
on the notes of Abdullah Ibrahim al-Ansari from the first of the
above-mentioned editions.
Since much Arabic writing is concise I have added extra
explanatory words in brackets [ ] if it seemed that the words
were implicit in the Arabic. Sometimes I added extra explanatory
comments of my own in parentheses ( ). If the matter seemed to
call for extra material I gave it a footnote.
Preface to the Second Edition
In this edition we include the Arabic texts of the forty hadith.
While doing that we took the opportunity to update a few matters
in the text, the most substantial of which is to use the translations
vvii vii

--- Page 8 ---
of the ayat of al-Qur’an al-Karim from The Noble Qur’an: a new
rendering of its meaning in English by Abdalhaqq and Aisha Bewley,
published by Bookwork, Norwich 1999. We do that because their
translation is based on the meanings always understood by the
Muslims as expressed in the classical tafsir literature. Besides
that, the Bewleys are also native English speakers and this is the
most readable translation of the meanings of the Qur’an and the
most direct.
Preface to the Third Edition
The most substantial change to this edition has been to name
the hadith, for example: 1. Intention, 2. Islam, Iman and Ihsan,
etc., and to use these names in the table of contents and the
headers to facilitate use of the book, for it is clear that this is a
book that ought to be used rather than read once and left.
vviiiiii

--- Page 9 ---
Translator’s Introduction
Imam an-Nawawi, may Allah show mercy to him, never
intended merely to record forty hadith in a book and
release them to the public. The book which he wrote was
his collection of forty-two hadith together with the absolute
minimum of fiqh and linguistic commentary which he felt
necessary for people not to misunderstand the import of these
hadith. Ibn ‘Uyaynah said, “Hadith are misleading except to
those who have fiqh.” Ibn Wahb said, “Every man of hadith who
has no imam in fiqh is astray. If Allah had not rescued us by
Malik and al-Layth we would have gone astray.”
It is clear from reading the hadith literature that the
Companions, who were pre-eminently men of fiqh, received their
Islam by means of what we would call ‘taqlid’ which continued
to be the means of Islam’s transmission from one generation
to the next. Taqlid is that people see with the eyes of the heart
something so overwhelmingly clear that they imitate it, whether
consciously or unconsciously. While this is not a decision to
abandon the intellect, this word is usually translated pejoratively
as ‘blind imitation’. Many modern Muslims imagine that we have
a wisdom superior to that because of living in a ‘more enlightened’
techno-scientific age. We place that concept in inverted commas
because our measure of all enlightenment is the noble conduct
of the Messenger of Allah @ and his Companions in Madinah,
a measure which shows this age to be one of the most barbaric
there has ever been.
Imam Malik is reported to have said, “Only that which was
vviiiiii ix

--- Page 10 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
effective for the first of this community will be effective for the
last of it.” For the Companions the encounter with the Prophet
@ was so extraordinary that they modelled themselves entirely
upon him, sometimes even in the smallest customs and actions.
As every parent witnesses, that is a major part of the process by
which children learn to become adult human beings. It is from
the very essence of the human being. Knowledge is not merely
sets of propositions and transmission is not just to convey those
propositions to another.
This is not to denigrate the author of this book or any of the
noble transmitters of traditional knowledge of this Muslim
community. If we were to examine the lives of the great people
of knowledge of our community we would find them to have
been overwhelmed by the luminous characters and behaviour of
the men and women from whom they learnt. For if the sciences
have not illuminated their transmitters there is little point in
transmitting them.
Thus we find Imam Malik, may Allah show mercy to him,
saying, “Knowledge is a light which Allah places where He will;
it is not much narration.” We must accept this from Malik since
his capacity for accurate narration of hadith is not in doubt, but
here he is calling us to something beyond texts and certainly
beyond isnads.
The unique achievement of the Prophet @ unparalleled in
all history before or since, is to have transformed the lives and
practice of the elite and the ordinary people of an entire city,
and from there to have transformed Arabia and the world. That
miracle continues in our time. Yet Madinah was the core group,
trained, educated and civilised by the last of the Messengers @.
The next generations learnt their Islam as a generation from
the Companions ô. That transmission was most concentrated
and authentic in Madinah. ‘Amal is the term which denotes the
actual practice of the people of Madinah. The Companions
transmitted it to the Followers, and they to the Followers of the
Followers. All of these generations further enriched the record
of the practice by their intelligent resolution of new issues in
xx

--- Page 11 ---
Translator’s Introduction
accordance with their profound knowledge of the Book and
the Sunnah. Most significantly, that record includes their mode
of transacting commercially without usury, the knowledge of
which sustained and enriched Muslim culture for centuries and
is desperately needed by the world today. The practice of the
people of Madinah of those first generations is itself the best
evidence of the Sunnah because it is like a mutawatir hadith
which has been transmitted by huge numbers of reliable people
of one generation to equally large numbers of reliable people of
the next. In this age the best result expected of the culture of
the solitary narrator is the well-meaning ‘good Muslim’ who is
himself only too aware that he is ineffectual.
Malik, along with his pre-eminence as a narrator of hadith,
recorded the ‘amal – the practice – so that it might be a wellspring
for civilisations to come, as it has been and as it will continue to
be insha’Allah. These hadith from the noble Imam an-Nawawi,
may Allah show mercy to him, make most sense when set within
the ‘amal of a dynamic and resurgent Islam like jewels in the
bezel of the ring.
Two further matters in particular need to be clarified, as they
constitute two of the warp threads on which the weft of this text
is woven and thus all of Islam. First is the issue of sadaqah. The
worst translation of this word is the Christian ‘charity’. It is a
salutary lesson for those Muslims rushing to embrace the Jews
and Christians as brothers from the ‘Abrahamic and monotheistic
faiths’ – an abhorrent concept covering over the Jews’ crimes of
slandering and murdering the prophets and men of Allah, and the
Christians’ idolisation of Sayyiduna ‘Isa ï – that over a century
ago a non-Muslim, the German philosopher Nietzsche, showed
how terminally sick Judaeo-Christian culture is. Nietzsche called
for a revaluation of all values. In his most thorough statement
of that analysis, The Antichrist, he had also begun to declare that
Islam does not share in that degeneracy. Perhaps if he had been
granted more years of sanity by the grace of Allah he might have
come to see that Islam is itself the very revaluation of all values
for which he had called. However, we have been disappointed in
xx xi

--- Page 12 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
some of our early translators into English who went out of their
way to prove that Islam is absolutely acceptable to the Jews and
the Christians. Thus these translators have wherever possible
taken hold of Christian ecclesiastical language to translate the
classic texts of Islam. Al-hamdulillah, more recent translators
have accepted that key Arabic terms are untranslatable and that
with the increasing familiarity with Arabic of English-speaking
Muslims it is simplest to leave words like ‘deen’, for example, rather
than choosing ‘religion’.
However, with a word such as ‘sadaqah’, we must remove a
misunderstanding that now adheres to the Arabic word itself.
That is that in current usage sadaqah is used for the extra optional
acts of generosity after the payment of zakah. However, even a
slight acquaintance with our heritage of tafsir and fiqh quickly
disabuses us of this erroneous notion. Sadaqah is the entire zone
which encompasses the obligatory zakah, the optional extra acts
of giving, and other acts such as establishing awqaf endowments,
but it is very often used exclusively for zakah itself. It is used in
these forty-two hadith both in the sense of zakah and extra acts
of generosity.
This is of importance to us in this age because, properly
speaking, the pillar of zakah does not exist. That is for a number
of reasons. The first reason is that zakah is not a charity. It is
certainly a noble intention to pay from one’s earnings in order to
discharge the obligation that one owes to Allah, but something
more is called for – a striving to recreate the authentic form of
zakah. Zakah is not a voluntary giving to the poor, but rather it
is an obligation of Islam. It is collected by the imams – i.e. the
khalifah and the amirs of the Muslims – by force if necessary. A
man may be fought and killed for refusing to pay the zakah as the
Imam states so unequivocally.
The second reason is that the zakah can only be taken in
something real which is itself halal and from a halal economy;
it must be paid in gold, silver, cattle, or grains, etc. If the
entire economy is based on usurious instruments, what zakah is
possible? I must refer the reader to the works of Umar Ibrahim
xxiiii

--- Page 13 ---
Translator’s Introduction
Vadillo, particularly The Return of the Gold Dinar, for a thorough
exposition of this matter. However, in summary it is that the
banknote and other credit instruments are entirely usurious
even before we consider the matter of interest, and may not be
used to pay zakah.
Let us not be sidetracked into the fruitless debates of amateur
‘ulama which so plague our age. Let us instead be a little political.
All these instruments are entirely the creation of the enemies of
Islam and are under their control. All banks, including equity
banks, which are sometimes called Islamic banks, operate under
usurious prerequisites that allow them to lend money created
out of nothing. Thus most of the currency of the paper-money
system that we use comes into circulation as a debt to the banks.
Neither the banknote, a usurious instrument, nor any kind of
promissory note (in Arabic called dayn) can be used to pay
zakah.
It is the individual obligation of every Muslim to restore that
pillar, since zakah is an individual obligation on every Muslim
man and woman. The Muslim must pay zakah in gold and silver.
We need no argument for the above. If any argument were
needed for the Dinar and Dirham, it would be sufficient to say
that they were the usage of the Messenger of Allah @ and of the
Companions and of all the right-acting generations of Muslims
up to our day, and that all the texts mention them and all of these
generations paid their zakah with them. Banks and paper money
are the invention of kuffar and they continue to impoverish us.
The return to the Islamic Dinar as the one world currency of the
Muslims is the beginning of our prosperity.
The second warp thread of our text is inextricably linked with
the first: it is the matter of leadership, authority and governance.
The abolition of the Khilafah is the other great bid’ah of our
time. It is an awkward fact of history that the very movement
which is most vocal in speaking out against bid’ah participated
treacherously with kuffar in the destruction of the Khalifate. The
story of that event is for the first time clearly exposed in the The
Return of the Khalifate by Shaykh Dr Abdalqadir as-Sufi, in which
xxiiii xiii

--- Page 14 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
he also outlines the route to its revival. The restoration of the
Khalifate and its amirates is an individual obligation on every
Muslim. Every single Muslim is obliged to pledge allegiance to a
leader, as is established in the Sunnah, and to obey him and pay
his zakah to him. That restoration will not proceed by the erection
of an Islamic State, but by the compelling imperative on each
Muslim to obey one worthy to lead. This is no more complicated
than the issue a group of Muslims face each prayer time; someone
is always found who is most fitted to lead the prayer and everyone
intuitively recognises the right man. Leadership is analogous to
that. If each Muslim community accepts and affirms its natural
leaders, from among the leaders of the leaders most assuredly
an Amir for the Muslims will emerge. This is the Sunnah of the
Muslims, just as representational democracy, constitutionalism
and republicanism are innovations of the Jews, Christians and
Freemasons. We need no excuse nor proof for choosing the
former and only a clear hypocrite could call us to the latter.
That is our situation. A pillar of Islam and the entire model of
Islamic governance-without-state have been demolished, and it is
the personal obligation of every Muslim and Muslimah to see them
restored. It is not from the fiqh of Islam to engage in an optional
act when the obligatory act has not been discharged, nor to
expend energy in combating things which are disapproved when
the haram is everywhere in evidence. It is a deviant understanding
of Islam that levels all of these distinctions of fiqh and reduces
matters to whether or not a text has an isnad. With this text we
are safe, however, since it comes from a man of knowledge who
was ‘amil, i.e. active in establishing the deen, and who was himself
a noted faqih.
For this text to make sense it must not be modified to fit into the
age in which we live as if the parameters of kufr were immutable,
rather it must be an instrument we use in shaping the age in which
we live for the sake of Allah.
xxiivv

--- Page 15 ---
Imam an-Nawawi’s Introduction
Praise belongs to Allah, Lord of the Worlds, the One Who
sustains the heavens and the earth, the One Who manages
all the creatures, Who sent the messengers – the blessings
of Allah and His peace be upon them all – to those who are
charged with responsibility, to guide them and to make clear
to them the laws of the deen, with absolute evidences and clear
proofs. I praise Him for all of His blessings, and I ask Him for
increase of His bounty and His generosity. I witness that there is
no god but Allah alone, no partner to Him, the Overpowering
One, the Nobly Generous, the Repeatedly Forgiving. I witness
that Sayyiduna1 Muhammad is His Slave and His Messenger,
and His Beloved and His Intimate Friend, the best of created
beings, the one who was honoured with the Mighty Qur’an –
the miracle which continues with the succession of years – and
with the Sunnahs which are illuminating for those who seek to
take the right way, Sayyiduna Muhammad who was singled out
with comprehensive words which gather many different levels
of meaning in them, and ease and liberality in the deen, the
blessings of Allah and His peace be upon him and upon the rest
of the prophets and messengers, and the families of all of them
1 Sayyid is translated in Lane’s Lexicon as chief, lord, master. Sometimes a
confusion arises in the use of a word such as ‘lord’ since that is also used to
translate ‘rabb’ although then in English it is conventional to use a capital letter,
i.e. ‘Lord’. Indeed, even the Arabic term ‘rabb’ may be used linguistically for
other than Allah, e.g. rabb al-bayt ‘the man of the house’, although by a specific
hadith it is frowned upon for a slave to address his master as ‘rabbi – my lord’ or
conversely for the master to address a slave as ‘abdi – my slave’.
xxiivv 1

--- Page 16 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
and the rest of the people of right action.
We have narrated from ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, ‘Abdullah ibn Mas’ud,
Mu’adh ibn Jabal, Abu’d-Darda’, Ibn ‘Umar, Ibn ‘Abbas, Anas ibn
Malik, Abu Hurairah and Abu Sa’id al-Khudri ô through many
different paths and varieties of narrations, that the Messenger of
Allah @ said, “Whoever preserves forty hadith for my ummah in
the affair of their deen, then Allah will raise him up on the Day
of Rising in the company of the people of fiqh2 and the people of
knowledge,” and in the narration of Abu’d-Darda’, “And I will be
for him on the Day of Rising an intercessor and a witness,” and in
the narration of Ibn Mas’ud, “It will be said to him ‘Enter through
whichever door of the Garden you will,” and in the narration of
Ibn ‘Umar, “He will be recorded in the company of the people of
knowledge and gathered in the company of the shuhada3.” Those
who memorise hadith agree that it is a weak hadith even though
it is narrated through many different paths.
The people of knowledge ô have compiled innumerable
books in this area. The first that I know to have compiled in this
area was ‘Abdullah ibn Mubarak, then later Ibn Aslam at-Tusi
the lordly man of knowledge, then later al-Hasan ibn Sufyan
an-Nasa’i and Abu Bakr al-Ajuri, Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn
Ibrahim al-Asfahani, ad-Daraqutni, al-Hakim, Abu Nu’aym, Abu
‘Abd ar-Rahman as-Sulami, Abu Sa’id al-Malini, Abu ‘Uthman
as-Sabuni, Abdullah ibn Muhammad al-Ansari, Abu Bakr
al-Bayhaqi, and a whole lot of other people of the first and later
generations who cannot be enumerated.
I sought the choice of Allah [through the du’a known as
istikharah] as to the matter of collecting forty hadith, modelling
myself on the noted people of knowledge and guardian
2 Fiqh is discrimination, the ability to discern what is obligatory,
recommended, permitted, disapproved, and forbidden. Its root meaning is
‘understanding’ and it is used in this way in the Noble Qur’an.
3 Shuhada’ ‘the witnesses’ are first and foremost those who die fighting in
the way of Allah, although other categories are mentioned in hadith. They
pass straight to the Garden at death and do not await the Resurrection or the
Reckoning.
22

--- Page 17 ---
Imam an-Nawawi’s Introduction
memorisers of Islam. The people of knowledge are unanimously
agreed that it is permissible to act upon a weak hadith in the
excellences of actions.4 However, along with that I do not depend
on this hadith, but rather on his saying @ in the sahih hadith,
“Let whoever of you witnesses convey it to those who are absent,”
and his words @ “May Allah illuminate a man who hears my
words and keeps them in mind and then conveys them just as he
heard them.”
Among the people of knowledge there are those who collected
forty hadith on the principles of the deen, some of them on the
derivative rulings, some on jihad, some on zuhd – doing without,
some on courtesies, some of them on public addresses, all of
which are worthy purposes, may Allah be pleased with those who
purposed them. My view was that I should collect forty hadith
more important than all of that, i.e. forty hadith encompassing
all of that, every one of which is one of the great principles of
the deen and which the people of knowledge have described in
such terms as “the deen revolves around it,” or “it is a half of
Islam” or “a third of it,” etc. Moreover, I decided to insist on
these forty being sahih, the majority of them being from the two
sahih books of al-Bukhari and Muslim, and that I should mention
them without their chains of transmission in order to make their
memorisation easy and to make the benefit derived from them
more universal, insha’Allah, exalted is He. Then I decided to
follow up each one with a chapter elucidating what is hidden in
their wordings. Whoever longs for the next life ought to know
these hadith because of the important matters they comprise,
and that which they encapsulate which draws attention to all the
acts of obedience, and that is obvious to whoever considers it. I
depend upon Allah and to Him do I commit myself and His is
the praise and the blessing, and by Him is success and protection
from error.
4 As opposed to the fundamentals and obligations.
22 3

--- Page 18 ---
4

--- Page 19 ---
1. Intention
1: Intention
The Amir al-Muminin Abu Hafs ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab1 î
said, “I heard the Messenger of Allah @ saying, ‘Actions
are only by intentions, and every man has only that
which he intended. Whoever’s emigration is for Allah and His
Messenger then his emigration is for Allah and His Messenger.
Whoever’s emigration is for some worldly gain which he can
acquire or a woman he will marry then his emigration is for
that for which he emigrated’.”
The two Imams of the hadith scholars narrated it – Abu
Abdullah Muhammad ibn Isma’il ibn Ibrahim ibn al-Mughirah
ibn Bardizbah al-Bukhari and Abu’l-Husein Muslim ibn
al-Hajjaj ibn Muslim al-Qushayri an-Naysaburi – in their two
sahih books which are the most sahih books compiled.
1 He was the first to be titled “the Amir al-Muminin”. The one who gave him
the kunya of Abu Hafs was the Prophet @ because of the severity that he saw in
him. Al-Hafs is a dialect meaning “Lion”. He gave him the title of “al-Farouq –
the Discriminator” because he used to distinguish and discriminate between
truth and falsehood. He was the first to declare his Islam openly, and by Him
Allah aided the da’wah of the Affirmed Truthful One when he said @ “O
Allah, strengthen Islam by the more beloved of the two men to you: ‘Umar ibn
al-Khattab or ‘Amr ibn Hisham (Abu Jahl).”
The reason for his Islam was that when the acceptance of Islam by his sister
Fatimah and her husband Sa’d ibn Zayd reached him, he intended to go and
punish them, then his sister recited to him something from the Qur’an and he
accepted Islam.
The Muslims greatly rejoiced in his acceptance of Islam and the Prophet
@ gave him good news of the Garden, and bore witness for him that Allah,
exalted is He, put the truth upon his tongue and in his heart, and that shaytan
fled from him. He is the best of the Companions after Abu Bakr î and they
agree unanimously about the great quantity of his knowledge, the strength of
his intelligence and of his doing-without, his humility and gentleness towards
the Muslims, and his great concern for whatever would benefit them. He has
many virtues. ‘Umar narrated five hundred and thirty nine hadith from the
Messenger of Allah @. He lived for sixty-three years and died as a shaheed,
stabbed by Abu Lu’lu’ah, and was buried along with the Prophet @. His khilafah
lasted ten years, six months and five nights.
4 5

--- Page 20 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
Commentary
The hadith indicates that intention is the measure for rendering
actions true, so that where intention is sound action is sound, and
where it is corrupt then action is corrupt.
Wherever there is action accompanied by intention, then there are
three states:
First, that one does it out of fear of Allah, exalted is He, and this
is the worship of slaves.
Second, that one does it seeking the Garden and reward, and this
is the worship of traders.
Third, that one does it out of modesty and shame before Allah,
exalted is He, discharging the right of service and discharging [the
duty of] gratitude, along with that seeing oneself falling short, and
that one’s heart is fearful because one does not know whether or
not one’s action is accepted. This is the worship of free people, and
the Messenger of Allah @ indicated it when ‘A’ishah, may Allah be
pleased with her, said to him, when he stood at night until his two
feet swoll, “Messenger of Allah, why do you impose this upon yourself
whilst Allah has forgiven you your earlier errors and any later ones?”2 He
said, “Shall I not be a grateful slave?”
If it is said, “Is it better to worship with fear or with hope?” It
must be said, “Al-Ghazali said, may Allah show mercy to him,
‘Worship with hope is better because hope causes love and fear
causes despair’.”
There are three divisions with respect to those who are sincere.
You must know that sincerity is exposed to the defect of conceit
and whoever is conceited about his action then his action is
invalid, as it is invalid if he is arrogantly proud. The second state
is that one does that seeking both the world and the next life.
One of the people of knowledge took the position that [in that
case] his action is rejected and he sought a proof of that from
his words @ in the Lordly hadith (hadith qudsi), “Allah, exalted
is He, says, ‘I am the most independent of partners, so whoever
does an action in which he makes other than Me a partner, then
2 Surat al-Fath: 2.
66

--- Page 21 ---
1. Intention
I am free of it’.”3 This was the position that al-Harith al-Muhasibi
took in the book ar-Ri’ayah. He said, “Sincerity is that you intend
Him by obedience to Him and that you do not intend any other
than Him.” There are two types of showing off: first, that one
only intends people by obedience to Him. The second is that
one intends people and the Lord of people, and both of these
invalidate action. The Hafidh Abu Nu’aym transmitted this
statement from some of the first communities in al-Hilyah. One
of them took a proof of that from His words, exalted is He, “The
Compeller, the Supremely Great. Glory be to Allah above all they associate
with Him.”4 For just as He is too great to have a wife and child and
a partner, He is too great to accept an action in which other than
Him is made a partner. He, exalted is He, is Greater and Great
and Supremely Great. As-Samarqandi said, may Allah show mercy
to him, “Whatever is done for the sake of Allah is accepted, and
whatever is done for the sake of people is rejected.” An example
of that is whoever prays Dhuhr, and intends by it to discharge
the duty of what Allah has made obligatory upon him, but he
lengthens its parts and its recitation and makes its organisation
beautiful for the sake of people; the basic part of the prayer is
acceptable, but its length and its beautification for the sake of
people are unacceptable because he intends people by them.
Shaykh ‘Izzu’d-Din ibn ‘Abd as-Salam was asked about someone
who prays and lengthens his prayer because of people, and he
said, “I hope that his action will not be invalid.” All of this is in
the case where the association of partners occurs in attributes
of the action. However, if it happens in the source of the action
so that one prays the obligatory prayer for the sake of Allah,
exalted is He, and for the sake of people, then one’s prayer is
not acceptable because of the association of partners in the very
source of the action.
Just as showing off can be in an action, it can be in the
abandonment of an action. Al-Fudayl ibn ‘Iyad said, “Leaving
3 Ibn Majah, Ibn Khuzaymah and al-Bayhaqi narrated it. Ibn Majah
narrated it (among the) trustworthy.
4 Surat al-Hashr: 23.
66 7

--- Page 22 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
an action because of people is showing off, and doing an action
because of people is associating a partner with Allah, and
sincerity is that Allah should protect one from both of them.”
The meaning of what he said, may Allah show mercy to him, is
that whoever resolves on an act of worship and leaves it for fear
that people may see it, then it is a form of showing off since he
gave up an action because of people. However, if he gave it up
in order to pray it in solitude this is recommended and desirable
unless it is an obligatory prayer or an obligatory zakah, or he is
a man of knowledge upon whom people model themselves, for
being open about an act of worship in these cases is better.
Just as showing off invalidates action, so does seeking good
report, which is that one does an act for Allah in solitude and
then later tells people what one did. He said @ “Whoever makes
others hear [of his actions] Allah will make others hear of him,
and whoever makes a show [of his actions] Allah will make a
show of him.”5 The people of knowledge say that if one is a man
of knowledge upon whom people model themselves and one
mentions it in order to encourage the listeners to action so that
they might act in accordance with it, then there is no harm in it.
Al-Mirzabani said, may Allah show mercy to him, “The one who
prays needs four qualities so that his prayer will be raised up [to
Allah]: presence of the heart, witnessing of the intellect, stillness
in the basic elements and submission of the limbs. Whoever
prays without the presence of heart is distracted, whoever prays
without the witnessing of the intellect is forgetful, whoever prays
without humility of the limbs is mistaken, whoever prays without
stillness in the basic elements is uncouth, and whoever prays with
all these elements has fulfilled the prayer.”
By his saying @ “Actions are only by intentions” he meant acts
of obedience aside from acts which are permissible. Al-Harith
al-Muhasibi said, “Sincerity is not relevant for permitted actions
because they are not acts of drawing near [to Allah] nor do
they lead to drawing near, for example raising up buildings for
5 Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated it.
88

--- Page 23 ---
1. Intention
no [higher] purpose other than frivolity. However, if it is for a
purpose such as mosques, aqueducts and ribat-fortresses then
they are desirable and recommended [acts and not merely
permissible].” He said, “There is no sincerity in an act which is
forbidden nor in something frowned upon, such as someone who
looks at that which is not permitted for him to look at, claiming
that he looks at it in order to reflect upon the workmanship of
Allah, exalted is He, for example, one who looks at a beardless
youth. There is no sincerity in this, indeed there is no act of
drawing near [to Allah] in it at all.” He said, “Truthfulness in
the attribute of the slave is in the matching of the secret and the
public, the outward and the inward. Truthfulness is realised by
realising all of the stations and states, so much so that sincerity
needs truthfulness, and truthfulness does not need anything,
since the reality of sincerity is intending Allah, exalted is He,
by the act of worship. One may intend Allah by the prayer but
be neglectful of the presence of the heart in it. Truthfulness is
intending Allah, exalted is He, by the act of worship along with
the presence of the heart with Him. Every true one is sincere, but
not every sincere one is true. That is the meaning of ‘union and
separation’, since he has separated from other than Allah and
united with the presence by Allah. It is the meaning of isolation
from what is other than Allah and adornment with the presence
before Allah i.”
His saying @ “Actions are only by intentions” carries the
possibilities of “the soundness of actions are only …” or “the
rendering of actions sound…” or “the acceptance of actions…” or
“the perfection of actions…”. This was what Imam Abu Hanifah
took, may Allah be merciful to him. One excludes from actions
those of the category of removal, such as removing dirt, returning
property obtained through extortion and loans, conveying a
present, etc., for the soundness of these actions does not depend
upon the intention having been made authentic, rather the
reward for them depends upon having intended them as acts of
drawing near. For example, one who feeds his animal, if he does
so in obedience to the command of Allah, exalted is He, will be
88 9

--- Page 24 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
rewarded, but if he intends by it preservation of his wealth then
there is no reward for that, as al-Qarafi said. The exception to
that case is the horse of a man fighting jihad, for when he ties
it up in the way of Allah, if it drinks and he did not intend to
give it water he will be rewarded for that, as is narrated in Sahih
al-Bukhari, and similarly for one’s wife. Also locking the door
and extinguishing the lamp upon going to sleep, if one intends
by them obedience to the command of Allah one is rewarded,
and if one intends some other thing, then one will not.
You must know that ‘intention’ is a word for ‘purpose’. It is
said, “May Allah intend good for you,” i.e. “May He purpose it
for you.” Intention in the shari’ah is to purpose a thing coupled
with the doing of it. If one purposes it and then does it later it is
‘resolve’.
Intention is made a part of the shari’ah in order to distinguish
customary actions from acts of worship, or to distinguish one
act of worship from another. An example of the former is sitting
in the mosque, which is customarily intended for rest but could
also be meant as worship if the intention is for i’tikaf .6 That which
distinguishes custom from worship is intention. Similarly one
customarily intends by a complete washing of the body to clean
the body, but the intention can also be as an act of worship (i.e.
ghusl). That which distinguishes these two cases is the intention,
which the Prophet @ indicated when he was asked about the man
who fought in order to show off, the man who fought defensively
and the man who fought courageously, as to which of them is
fighting in the way of Allah, exalted is He? He said, “Whoever
fights so that the word of Allah should be the uppermost then he
is in the way of Allah, exalted is He.”7
An example of the latter, which is distinguishing between the
different degrees of worship, is someone who prays four rak’ats
6 I’tikaf is retreat within the mosque in the last ten days of Ramadan.
Similarly, sitting having prayed the sunnah prayers and waiting for the
obligatory prayer is an act of worship.
7 Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated it.
1100

--- Page 25 ---
1. Intention
by which he could intend the midday prayer or sunnah prayers,8
and that which distinguishes these two is the intention. Similarly,
freeing a slave can be intended as an expiation for a wrong action
and for other purposes such as [expiation of] vows [which have
been broken] etc., and here that which distinguishes them is the
intention.
Respecting his words @ “There is only for each man that
which he intends”, there is an indication that it is not permitted
to deputise for someone else in acts of worship nor appoint
someone as an agent from the same intention. The exceptions in
this case are distribution of zakah and sacrifice of an ‘Eid animal,
for appointing someone as an agent is permissible in both these
cases in the intention, and to slaughter [an animal for ‘Eid] and
to distribute [the zakah] along with the capability to make the
intention. In the Hajj it is not permitted [to appoint someone to
go in one’s place] if one has the capability [of doing it oneself].
Paying a debt: as for when it is for one purpose it does not need an
intention. But if it is for two purposes such as someone who owes
two thousands, one of which is for something he has pawned,
and he pays a thousand and says “I have paid it for the pawned
item,” then he is right. If he did not intend anything at the time
he paid he may form and declare the intention after that and
make it for whatever he wishes [i.e. to pay for the pawned item or
just as a payment for his debt. It assumes that both debts are to
the same person.] There is no other intention which we can delay
until after the action and yet it remains sound except here.
His saying @ “Whoever’s emigration is for Allah and His
Messenger then his emigration is for Allah and His Messenger.
Whoever’s emigration is for some worldly gain which he can
acquire or a woman he will marry then his emigration is for
that for which he emigrated”: the root of ‘emigration’ is ‘flight’
and ‘abandoning’. The term ‘Hijrah’ is used for a number of
matters:
First, the emigration of the Companions ô from Makkah
8 Hanafis permit four rak’ats without a tasleem after the second rak’ah as a
sunnah prayer.
1100 11

--- Page 26 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
to Abyssinia when those who associated partners with Allah
were harming the Messenger of Allah @ so they fled from it
to the Negus. This was five years after the sending [of the
Messenger @], al-Bayhaqi said.
The second emigration was from Makkah to Madinah, and
it was thirteen years after the sending [of the Prophet @]. It
was obligatory on every Muslim in Makkah to emigrate to
the Messenger of Allah @ in Madinah. A group said without
qualification that emigration was obligatory from Makkah to
Madinah, however this is not the unqualified case, since there
is no particular virtue in Madinah, and what was obligatory
was the emigration to the Messenger of Allah @.
[Qadi Abu Bakr] Ibn al-‘Arabi said, “The people of knowledge
ô divided travel in the earth into flight and search, and the
former sub-divides into six sub-divisions:
“First, going out from the abode of war to the abode of
Islam, and this remains until the Day of Rising. That which
ceased with the Opening [of Makkah to Islam] according to
his words @ ‘There is no emigration after the Opening’,9 was
the emigration to the Messenger of Allah @ where he was.
“Second, leaving the people of innovation. Ibn al-Qasim
said, ‘I heard Malik say, “It is not permitted for anyone to
remain in a land in which the first community are being
cursed.”10’
“Third, leaving a land where the haram is predominant,
since it is obligatory on every Muslim to seek the halal.
“Fourth, fleeing from harm to one’s body. It is one of the
bounties of Allah that He makes an allowance for that. If
someone fears for himself in a place then Allah permits him
to leave it, and fleeing with oneself will save one from that
peril. The first to do that was Ibrahim ï when he feared his
people and said, ‘I am leaving this place to follow the pleasure of
9 Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated it.
10 Extremist shi’ahs such as the Fatimids used to pronounce curses on some
of the Companions.
1122

--- Page 27 ---
1. Intention
my Lord.’11 He, exalted is He, says, telling of Musa ï ‘So he left
there fearful and on his guard.’12
“Fifth, leaving unhealthy cities from fear of illness to go to
a healthy land. He @ permitted those suffering from a disease
called ‘aran,13 when they found Madinah bad for their health,
to leave and go to pasture-land.
“Sixth, leaving from fear of financial harm, since the sanctity
of a Muslim’s wealth is the same as the sanctity of his blood.
“As for the division of [travelling in] search, it sub-divides into
ten sub-divisions [under two main headings]: seeking the deen
and seeking the world. Seeking the deen has nine types:
“First, travelling for reflection; Allah, exalted is He,
says, ‘Have they not travelled in the earth and seen the final fate
of those before them?’14 Indeed, Dhu’l-Qarnayn travelled
around in the world in order to see its wonders.
“Second, the journey for Hajj.
“Third, the journey for Jihad.
“Fourth, the journey for livelihood.
“Fifth, the journey for trade and extra earning over
and above one’s food, which is permissible because of
His words, exalted is He, ‘There is nothing wrong in seeking
bounty from your Lord.’15
“Sixth, seeking knowledge.
“Seventh, intending to visit honoured places; he said
@ ‘Strenuous journeys are not undertaken except to
three mosques.’16
“Eighth, intending to go to the frontiers for ribat.17
11 Surat al-‘Ankabut: 29.
12 Surat al-Qasas: 20.
13 Pustules or possibly cracking and chapping of the skin, the former more
commonly arising among camels and the latter among horses.
14 Surat ar-Rum: 9.
15 Surat al-Baqarah: 198.
16 Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated it.
17 Manning ribat fortresses on the frontiers in defence of the Muslims, and
there training for war, practising dhikr of Allah and studying the deen. Said
by some to be superior even to jihad since ribat is striving to defend the lives,
1122 13

--- Page 28 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
“Ninth, visiting one’s brothers for the sake of Allah,
exalted is He. He said @ ‘A man visited a brother of
his in a town, and so Allah sent an angel in his path
who said to him, “Where do you intend [to go]?” He
said, “I am going to see a brother of mine in this town.”
He said, “Do you owe him any favour which you must
repay him?” He said, “No, it is only that I love him for
the sake of Allah, exalted is He.” He said, “Then I am
the messenger of Allah to you [with the message] that
Allah loves you just as you love him”.’ Muslim and others
narrated it.” [This is the end of what Qadi Abu Bakr ibn
al-‘Arabi said.]
[Continuing the list of types of hijrah:]
Third, the emigration of the tribes to the Messenger of
Allah @ in order to learn the laws of the shari’ah and then
return to their people and teach them.
Fourth, the emigration of one of the people of Makkah,
who became a Muslim, in order to come to the Prophet @ and
then return to his people.
Fifth, the emigration from the countries of kufr to the
countries of Islam for it is not desirable for a Muslim to reside
in the abode of kufr. Al-Mawardi said, “If he acquires family
and relatives, and it is possible for him to perform his deen
openly then it is not permissible for him to emigrate, since the
place in which he is has become for him an abode of Islam.”
Sixth, the Muslim’s forsaking (hijrah) his brother for more than
three days without a reason in the shari’ah, which is disapproved
of during the three days and haram every day beyond them,
unless because of an over-riding necessity. It has been told as a
story that a man forsook his brother for more than three days,
so he [his brother] wrote these verses of poetry to him:
“O my master, you have done me an injustice,
so seek from Ibn Abi Khaythamah a judgement about it,
because he narrates from his grandfather
property and honour of the Muslims whereas jihad is striving to spill the blood
of the kafirun.
1144

--- Page 29 ---
1. Intention
that which ad-Dahhak narrated from ‘Ikrimah,
from Ibn ‘Abbas from the Chosen One,
our Prophet who was sent with mercy,
that a close friend’s turning away from his close friend
for more than three days, our Lord has forbidden.”
Seventh, the husband’s forsaking his wife if her disobedience
is a fact. He said, exalted is He, “refuse to sleep with them (lit.:
forsake them in the beds).”18 Of that [too] is forsaking (hijrah)
disobedient people in place, in speech, in returning the
greeting and in opening with a greeting.
Eighth, the forsaking of everything which Allah has
forbidden and it is the most general and universal type of
hijrah.
His saying @ “So whoever’s emigration is for Allah and His
Messenger” i.e. in intention and purpose “then his emigration is
for Allah and His Messenger” in judgement and in shari’ah.
“Whoever’s emigration is for some worldly gain which he can
acquire…”. They transmit that a man emigrated from Makkah
to Madinah not wishing by that the excellence of emigration,
but only emigrating in order to marry a woman called Umm
Qays, and so he was called the Emigrant for the sake of Umm
Qays. If someone says that marriage is one of the things sought
of people in the shari’ah so why is it [here counted as] one of the
requirements of the world? Then the answer is, “Outwardly he
didn’t emigrate for her sake but for the sake of performing hijrah,
so that when [that which] he concealed [was] the opposite of
what he made known to people then he was worthy of reproach
and blame.” Analogous to that is someone who goes out with the
apparent intention of performing the Hajj but really intends to
go for trade.19 Similar [to that is] someone who travels to seek
knowledge and his purpose in that is to obtain leadership or a
18 Surat an-Nisa: 34.
19 Trade at Mina during Hajj after ‘Arafat is permissible by the specific
ayah of Qur’an “There is nothing wrong in seeking bounty from your Lord” (Surat
al-Baqarah: 198) which occurs in the midst of the ayat on Hajj, but the intention
of going on Hajj must have been for the Hajj and not t he trade.
1144 15

--- Page 30 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
governorship.
From his saying @ “Then his emigration is for that for which
he emigrated,” it necessarily follows that there is no reward for
someone whose purpose in the Hajj is trade and for visiting.
The hadith has to be interpreted that if the thing which set him
moving and sent him to the Hajj was only the trade [then he
has no reward], but if the thing which sent him was [the desire
to perform] the Hajj then he will have the reward and [he will
have] the trade consequent to it, except that he will have a lesser
reward than someone who brought himself out for the Hajj
[alone]. If the thing which sent him out on the Hajj was both of
them then it is conceivable that he will obtain the reward, since
his travel was not set in motion for the sake of the world, but the
opposite is also conceivable (i.e. that he has no reward), since he
mixed an action for the next life with an action for the world.
However, the hadith grades the judgement according to the
purpose purely, and so it is not true that someone who intended
both of them (the next life and the world) only intended the
world, and Allah i knows best.
16

--- Page 31 ---
16

--- Page 32 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
1188

--- Page 33 ---
2. Islam, Iman and Ihsan
2: The Hadith of Jibril
on Islam, Iman and Ihsan
Umar î also said, “One day while we were sitting with
the Messenger of Allah @ a man came up to us whose
clothes were extremely white, whose hair was extremely
black, upon whom traces of travelling could not be seen, and
whom none of us knew, until he sat down close to the Prophet
@ so that he rested his knees upon his knees and placed his two
hands upon his thighs and said, ‘Muhammad, tell me about
Islam.’ The Messenger of Allah @ said, ‘Islam is that you witness
that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah, and establish the prayer, and give the zakah,
and fast Ramadan, and perform the Hajj of the House if you are
able to take a way to it.’ He said, ‘You have told the truth,’ and
we were amazed at him asking him and [then] telling him that
he told the truth. He said, ‘Tell me about iman.’ He said, ‘That
you believe in Allah, His angels, His books, His messengers,
and the Last Day, and that you believe in the Decree, the good
of it and the bad of it.’ He said, ‘You have told the truth.’ He
said, ‘Tell me about ihsan.’ He said, ‘That you worship Allah
as if you see Him, for if you don’t see Him then truly He sees
you.’ He said, ‘Tell me about the Hour.’ He said, ‘The one asked
about it knows no more than the one asking.’ He said, ‘Then
tell me about its signs.’ He said, ‘That the female slave should
give birth to her mistress, and you see poor, naked, barefoot
shepherds of sheep and goats competing in raising buildings.’
He went away, and I remained some time. Then he said, ‘Umar,
do you know who the questioner was?’ I said, ‘Allah and His
Messenger know best.’ He said, ‘He was Jibril who came to you
to teach you your deen’.” Muslim narrated it.
1188 19

--- Page 34 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
Commentary
His saying ï “Tell me about iman.” Linguistically, iman is
unqualified ‘affirmation’, and in the shari’ah it is an expression
denoting a particular affirmation, which is affirmation of
Allah, His angels, His books, His messengers, the Last Day, and
the Decree, the good and the bad of it. As for Islam, it is an
expression denoting the performance of the obligatory duties,
and it is compliance with [performance of] outward action.
Allah, exalted is He, [in Qur’an] contrasts Islam and iman as
in the hadith: Allah, exalted is He, says, “The desert Arabs say,
‘We have iman.’ Say: ‘You do not have iman. Say rather, “We have
become Muslim”.’”1 That is because the hypocrites used to pray,
fast and give sadaqah (i.e. the zakah) while yet denying it in
their hearts, so that when they claimed iman, Allah, exalted is
He, denied their claim of iman because of their hearts’ denial,
and He affirmed their claim of Islam because of their practice
of it. Allah, exalted is He, says, “When the hypocrites come to you
…” up until His words, exalted is He, “…and Allah bears witness
that the hypocrites are certainly liars,”2 i.e. [they are liars] in their
claiming to bear witness to the message while their hearts are
opposed, because their tongues do not agree with their hearts,
and the pre-condition of witnessing to the message is that the
tongue and the heart should be in agreement. Since iman is
a pre-condition for the soundness of Islam, Allah singled the
Muslims out from the mu’minun. Allah, exalted is He, says, “We
brought out all the mu’minun who were there but found in it only one
house of Muslims.”3 This is a homogeneous exception4 because of
1 Surat al-Hujurat: 14.
2 Surat al-Munafiqun: 1. “When the hypocrites come to you they say, ‘We bear
witness that you are indeed the Messenger of Allah.’ Allah knows that you are indeed
His Messenger and Allah bears witness that the hypocrites are certainly liars.”
3 Surat adh-Dhariyat: 35.
4 Istithna muttasil is homogeneous exception. The thing singled out – the
Muslims – is of the same nature as the thing from which it is singled out – the
mu’minun.
2200

--- Page 35 ---
2. Islam, Iman and Ihsan
that connection there is between the condition (iman) and that
which is stipulated (Islam), and for this reason Allah, exalted is
He, named the prayer ‘iman’. He said, exalted is He, “And Allah
would never let your iman go to waste.”5 He said, exalted is He, “You
had no idea of what the Book was, nor iman”6 i.e. the prayer [in both
ayat].7
His saying @ “And that you believe in the Decree, the good and
bad of it”, it can be with a fathah (a) on the [middle letter] dal
(i.e. qadar) or with a sukun (without a vowel, i.e. qadr); they are
two dialects. The position of the people of Truth is confirmation
of the Decree. Its meaning is that Allah i decreed things before
time, and He knew that they would come about at times known
to Him and in places known to Him, and that they would come
about according to how Allah had decreed.
Know that there are four decrees:
The first is the decree in knowledge, and for this reason it
is said, “[Divine] concern is [decreed] before the condition
of being a wali, and happiness is [decreed] before birth, and
subsequent [events] are based on predispositions.” Allah,
exalted is He, says, “Averted from it is he who is averted,”8 i.e.
he will be turned away from hearing the Qur’an and from
affirming it in the world who was turned away from it before
time. The Messenger of Allah said @ “Allah will not destroy
anyone except someone who is to perish,” i.e. someone who
is written in the knowledge of Allah as someone who is to
perish.
Second, the decree in the Preserved Tablet, and it is possible
5 Surat al-Baqarah: 140.
6 Surat ash-Shura: 42.
7 Calling the salat ‘iman’ is equivalent to the saying “Iman is a word on the
tongue, affirmation in the heart and actions with the limbs”. Iman may not be
equated with ‘belief’ in the Christian sense since it encompasses the meaning
of belief and much more. (Interestingly ‘belief’ comes an old root related to
the word ‘love’ and has the sense of trusting, cherishing and holding dear.) It
is clearly quite possible to have Islam without iman, which is to be a hypocrite,
but more difficult to have iman without Islam.
8 Surat adh-Dhariyat: 9.
2200 21

--- Page 36 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
that this decree may be altered. Allah, exalted is He, says,
“Allah erases whatever He wills or endorses it. And with Him is the
Original of the Book.”9 It is narrated that Ibn ‘Umar ô used to
say in his supplication:
ًاديع ِ س
َ
ين ِ ب
ْ
تُكْ او
َ
ين ِ ح
ُ
م
ْ
افَ اً ي
ّ
ق ِ شَ ين ِ تَب
ْ
تَكَ ت
َ
نكُ نِإ م
َّ
ه
ُ
لَّلاَ
“O Allah, if You have written me as grievous then erase me
(i.e. erase that decree) and write me as happy.”
Third, the decree in the womb, which is that the angel is
ordered to write his provision, his life-span, and whether he
is grievous or happy.
Fourth, the decreeing, which is the driving of decrees to their
times. Allah, exalted is He, created good and bad, and decreed
their coming to the slave at known times. The indication
and proof that Allah, exalted is He, created good and bad
is His words, exalted is He, “The evildoers are indeed misguided
and insane…” up to His words “…measure (decree).”10 This ayah
was revealed about the Qadariyyah,11 and that (i.e. ‘Taste the
scorching touch of Saqar!’) will be said to them in Jahannam. He
said, exalted is He, “Say, ‘I seek refuge with the Lord of daybreak,
from the evil of what He has created’.”12 [As to] this division [of the
decree], if graciousness towards a slave is obtained then it is
averted from him before it reaches him. In the hadith there is
that, “Sadaqah [zakah] and joining ties of kinship repel an evil
death and transform it into happiness.” In the hadith too there
is that, “Supplication and trial are between heaven and earth
fighting, and supplication repels trial before it can descend.”
The Qadariyyah claim that Allah, exalted is He, did not
decree things before time, that His knowledge of them does
not precede them, that they are just beginning now, that He,
9 Surat ar-Ra’d: 39.
10 Surat al-Qamar: 47: “The evildoers are indeed misguided and insane, on the
Day that they are dragged face-first into the Fire: ‘Taste the scorching touch of Saqar!’
We have created all things in due measure.”
11 Al-Qadariyyah are those who deny Allah’s decree and believe in human
free-will.
12 Surat al-Falaq, ayat 1-2.
2222

--- Page 37 ---
2. Islam, Iman and Ihsan
exalted is He, only knows about them after their occurrence,
and they have lied about Allah i – majestic is He above their
lying statements and exalted is He with a great exaltedness –
and these have perished. The Qadariyyah began to say in later
times that the good was from Allah and the evil from other than
Him, exalted is Allah above their statement. It is established
as an authentic statement that he said @ “The Qadariyyah are
the Magians of this community.”13 He called them Magians
(Zoroastrians) because of the resemblance of their school to
the school of the Magians. The dualists claim that good is from
the action of light and that evil is from the action of darkness
and so they become dualists. Similarly the Qadariyyah ascribe
good to Allah and evil to other than Him, and He, exalted
is He, is the Creator of good and evil.14 Imam al-Haramayn
said in the book al-Irshad, “Some of the Qadariyyah say, ‘We
are not Qadariyyah, rather you are Qadariyyah because you
believe in reports which are transmitted about the decree’,”
and he refuted these ignorant people saying that they ascribe
the decree to themselves. Whoever claims evil for his self and
ascribes it to it, then it is more fitting that it should be related
to him than to one who ascribes it to other than him and
rejects its attribution to himself.
About his saying @ “…‘Tell me about ihsan’. He said, ‘Ihsan is
that you worship Allah as if you see Him…’,” this is the station
13 Abu Dawud related it.
14 There is a very strong element of dualism in Judaeo-Christian culture,
i.e. the dominant world culture today, which is seen in the act of giving to
Satan an almost omnipotent power as the creator of evil. This has tainted the
modern age, so that for example ‘The Lord of the Rings’ and ‘Star Wars’ show an
ascription of ‘almost divine’ power to evil, with the good only just managing
to overpower it. The noble Imam an-Nawawi î affirms the position of the
people of Tawhid that Allah, exalted is He, is the author of good and evil,
which are both tests and trials from Him, blessed is He and exalted, evil not
having the absolute quality ascribed to it by some but a relative value only.
Dualistic thinking has also infected the Muslim community from the first
days, for example in elements of shi’ism, particularly and very strikingly the
thinking of Ali Shariati, and all modern movements which speak using a
dualistic application of the Qur’anic terms ‘haqq’ and ‘batil’, etc.
2222 23

--- Page 38 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
of witnessing. If one should be given the capacity to witness the
King, one would be too ashamed to turn towards other than Him
in the prayer and to occupy one’s heart with other than Him.
The station of witnessing is the station of the Siddiqun (the totally
truthful people). We have previously had an indication of that in
the first hadith.
His saying @ “…then He sees you” [to be] forgetful, if you are
forgetful in the prayer and holding inner conversations with
yourself in it.
His saying @ “…‘Tell me about the Hour.’ He said, ‘The one
asked about it is not more knowledgeable than the one who
asks’.” Is this response because he @ did not know when the Hour
would be? Indeed, the knowledge of the Hour is something
which Allah, exalted is He, alone possesses. Allah, exalted is He,
says, “Truly Allah has knowledge of the Hour.”15 He said, exalted is
He, “It hangs heavy in the heavens and the earth. It will not come upon
you except suddenly.”16 He said, exalted is He, “What will make you
understand? It may be that the Last Hour is very near.”17
Whoever claims that the duration of the world is seventy
thousand years and that sixty-three thousand years remain, it is
a false statement which at-Tukhi related in Asbab at-Tanzil from
some astrologers and numerologists. Whoever claims that the
duration of the world is seven thousand years, is postponing the
Unseen and it is not permitted to believe it.
His saying @ “… ‘Then tell me about its signs.’ He said, ‘That
the female slave should give birth to her mistress’.” Amar and
Amarah (a sign) with and without ta’ (marbutah) are both usages
in Arabic dialects. It has been narrated both as “her lord18”
and “her mistress”. The majority say that this informs us of the
plenitude of female slaves and their children [at that time],
because her child from her master has the status of her master,
15 Surah Luqman: 34.
16 Surat al-A’raf: 187.
17 Surat al-Ahzab: 63.
18 ‘ Rabbaha – her lord’ and this is an example of the linguistic use of ‘rabb’
for other than Allah.
2244

--- Page 39 ---
2. Islam, Iman and Ihsan
since a man’s wealth goes to his children.19 It has been said that it
refers to slave women giving birth to kings, so that she becomes
one of his subjects. It is possible for it to mean that a person
made his female slave pregnant with a child, then sold her,20 and
the child grew up and bought his mother. This is one of the signs
of the Hour.
His saying @ “And that you see poor, naked, barefoot shepherds
of sheep and goats competing in raising buildings.” Here ‘alah
are the fuqara’21 (the needy) and ‘a’il is the faqeer (the needy one)
and ‘aylah is need/poverty, and the verb is ‘ala (the past tense, “he
was or became needy”), ya’ilu (the present tense, “he is needy”)
and ‘aylah (the verbal noun “needing”). Ri’a (shepherds) with
the kasrah (i) under the ra’ and with a madd [on the alif after the
‘ayn] – and it has been said about it too ru’ah with a dammah (u)
on the ra’ and with the increase of a ta’ (marbutah) and without a
madd22 – its meaning is that people of the countryside, and their
like of people in need and want, rise high in building, and the
world is expanded for them so much that they compete boastfully
with each other in construction.
His saying @ “And he remained some time,” (labitha) is with
19 A great many of the khulafa’ of Islam have been the sons of slave
women.
20 It is not permitted to sell the mother of one’s children. From the
Muwatta’, “Malik related to me from Nafi’ from ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar that
‘Umar ibn al-Khattab said, ‘If a slave-girl gives birth to a child by her master,
he must not sell her, give her away or bequeath her. He enjoys her and when
he dies, she is free’.”
21 Faqir derives from the root ‘he was in need’, and so the fuqara’√ are ‘the
needy’ rather than ‘the poor’. For this reason the Sufis use the term in the
same sense as the Qur’anic ayah where Allah, exalted is He, says, “O mankind
you are the needy ones with respect to Allah…” rather than in the sense of that
category of people who are able to accept the zakah because of their ‘poverty’,
i.e. their material need.
22 Since it is very simple in Arabic to make a mistake in writing, printing or
reading, and to confuse letters from the same family such as ‘ayn and ghayn,
Arabic scholars, when commenting on a difficult word, spell it out in just such
a laborious way to make sure that no confusion can arise, specifying the letter
and whether it has diacritical points, and spelling out the vowelling as well.
2244 25

--- Page 40 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
an ‘a’ on the tha’ on the assumption that it is the third person
singular (‘he’), and it has been said that it is “I remained” (labithtu)
with the addition of the ta’ of the first person singular (‘I’), and
both of them are sahih. Maliyya with a shaddah on the ya’ means
“a long time”. In the narration of Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi
there is that he said, “After three days.” In the Sharh at-Tanbih of
al-Baghawi there is that he said, “After three or more,” and this
apparently means after three nights. Apparently this contradicts
the words of Abu Hurayrah in his hadith, “Then later the man
turned back and the Messenger of Allah @ said, ‘Bring the man
back to me,’ so they went to bring him back but could see nothing.
The Messenger of Allah @ said, ‘This was Jibril’.” It is possible to
harmonise these two by saying that ‘Umar î was not present when
the Prophet @ spoke to them at that time, because he had left the
gathering, and the Prophet @ told those assembled there at that
time and they told ‘Umar three days later since he had not been
present when the others were told.
In his statement @ “This was Jibril who came to teach you your
deen” there is a proof that iman, Islam and ihsan are together
called ‘deen’.
In the hadith there is proof that affirmation of the decree is
obligatory, that one must give up plunging into matters, and
that it is obligatory to be content with the decree. A man came
to Ahmad ibn Hanbal î and said, “Counsel me!” He said to
him, “If Allah, exalted is He, has undertaken responsibility for
provision then why your concern? If it is true that Allah will
replace [what you spend] then why meanness? If the Garden is
true why rest? If the questioning of Munkar and Nakir is true
why be cheerful? If the world is evanescent why be at ease? If
the reckoning is true why collect? If everything is ordained and
decreed then why fear?”
A Useful Point
The author of the Hilyat al-‘Ulama (Stations of the People of
Knowledge) mentioned that the whole world is divided into
twenty-five portions, five of which are by general and particular
2266

--- Page 41 ---
2. Islam, Iman and Ihsan
decree (qada and qadar), five by struggle and exertion, five of
which are by custom and habit, five by disposition23 and five by
inheritance. As for the five of them which are by general and
particular decree, they are provision, children, family, authority
and life-span. The five which are by exertion are the Garden, the
Fire, abstinence, horsemanship and writing. The five which are
habitual are eating, sleeping, walking, marriage, and relieving
oneself. The five which are by disposition are doing without,
sharpness of mind,24 giving, beauty and awe. The five which are
inherited are goodness, continuity, liberal generosity, truthfulness
and trustworthiness. None of this negates his saying @ “Everything
is by general and particular decree”.25 It only means that some of
these things are arranged according to cause, some of them have
no cause, and all of them are by general and particular decree.
23 Jawhar – ‘substance’ or ‘essence’, or what is in-built in the person’s nature,
i.e. their disposition.
24 Dhakah which means mental acuity. In both editions I used it was
mistakenly written as zakah.
25 Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated it.
2266 27

--- Page 42 ---
3: The Pillars of Islam
Abu ‘Abd ar-Rahman ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab1
î said, “I heard the Messenger of Allah @ say, ‘Islam is
built on five: witnessing that there is no god but Allah
and that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, establishment
1 ‘Abdullah became a Muslim in Makkah with his father while still young
and emigrated with him to Madinah. He was one of the Companions who was
learned in fiqh. He lived to a great age and transmitted to many of the great
ones of the next generation, one of the most famous of whom was his freed
slave Nafi’, one of the main teachers of Malik ibn Anas ô. Scholars count the
isnad: Malik from Nafi’ from Ibn Umar from the Messenger of Allah @ as the
‘Golden Isnad’. His son Salim was also one of the great fuqaha of his time.
28

--- Page 43 ---
3. The Pillars of Islam
of the prayer, payment of zakah, Hajj of the House, and the fast
of Ramadan’.” Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated it.
The Commentary
His saying @ “Islam is built on five,” i.e. so whoever produces
these five has completed his Islam. Just as the corners and walls
complete the house, Islam is completed by its pillars which are
five in number. This is ‘building’ in the realm of meaning whose
metaphor is physical building. The basis of the metaphor is that
when one of a physical building’s corners or sides is in ruin then
the building itself is incomplete, and it is similar for building in
the realm of meaning. For that reason he said @ “The prayer is
the pillar of the deen. Whoever abandons it has ruined the deen.”2
In that way it (a physical building) is analogous to it (the deen).
Something that has been said about building in the realm of
meaning is:
The construction of affairs, with the people of the deen, is as
long as they are right acting,
And if they turn away, then by the worst are they (affairs)
guided.
Men do not put chaos right if they have no leader,
and they have no leader if ignorant ones overmaster
[them].
And a house is not built unless it has pillars,
and it has no pillar if the pegs are not firm.
Allah struck a metaphor for the believers and the hypocrites.
He said, exalted is He, “Who is better: someone who founds his building
on taqwa of Allah and His good pleasure…?”3 wherein He compares
the building of the believer to one who places his building right
on the middle of a firm mountain, and He compares the building
of a disbeliever to one who places his building on the edge of the
crumbling bank of a sea, it having no stability, and at which the
2 Al-Bayhaqi narrated it from Ibn ‘Umar.
3 Surat at-Tawbah: 109.
28 29

--- Page 44 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
sea eats away so that the bank collapses, and thus the building
collapses and falls with him into the sea, and he is drowned and
enters Jahannam.
His saying @ “Islam is built on five…”, i.e. “on” with the meaning
of “with”, for if that were not the case then the building would
be something other than that with which it is built. If we were
to interpret it according to the strict literal meaning then the
“five” would be outside of Islam and that is a warped meaning.
It is possible that it (“on”) is with the meaning of “from” as in
His words, exalted is He, “…except on (‘ala) their spouses…”4 i.e. “…
from their spouses”.
The five which are mentioned in the hadith are the foundations
of the building. As for the supplementary matters and things
which complete [the building] they are like the rest of the duties,
and the other recommended acts which are the ornamentation
of the building. It has been narrated in hadith that he said @
“Iman is more than seventy branches the highest of which is the
saying ‘There is no god but Allah’,” and he said, “and the least of
which is removal of some harm from the pathway.”5
He said @ “And Hajj of the House and the fast of Ramadan”,
and thus it is in this narration with Hajj preceding the fast. This
is according to the order in which they are mentioned but not
according to their relative importance in judgement, since the
fast of Ramadan is a duty before the Hajj. In other narrations
the fast precedes the Hajj.
4 Surat al-Mu’minin: 6. “those who guard their private parts – except from their
wives…”. The ayah uses “‘ala (on)” in the sense of “min (from)”.
5 Agreed upon.
3300

--- Page 45 ---
3300 31

--- Page 46 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
4: The Decree
Abu ‘Abd ar-Rahman ‘Abdullah ibn Mas’ud1 î said, “The
Messenger of Allah @ told us – and he is the truthful
one who is confirmed, – ‘Any one of you, his creation
is gathered in the belly of his mother for forty days as a drop,
1 He became a Muslim very early on in Makkah, and it is said that he was
the sixth to accept Islam. The cause of his Islam was that the Prophet @ passed
by him when he was shepherding sheep and goats for ‘Uqbah ibn Abi Mu’ayt
and said to him, “Boy, do you have any milk for us to drink?” He said, “Yes, but
I have been entrusted [with it].” He said, “Do you have a lamb which the ram
has not yet mounted?” He said, “Yes,” and he brought it to him. The Prophet
@ rubbed its udder and supplicated and its udder filled with milk. He milked
it into a vessel which Abu Bakr î brought him. Then he said to the udder,
“Contract!” and it contracted, i.e. it returned to the condition in which it had
been, without milk. When he saw that, he accepted Islam î.
He dealt the death blow to Abu Jahl at the Battle of Badr.
Later he resided in Kufa and was the teacher there, transmitting his
knowledge to them. Therefore his traditions are one of the main pillars of
Hanafi fiqh.
He was the possessor of the Chosen One’s secret, and used to say, “By Allah
the One other than whom there is no god, no ayah from the Book of Allah
has been revealed but that I know where it was revealed, and about what it
was revealed. If I had known that anyone knew more about the Book of Allah
than me and it had been possible to reach him by camel I would have gone
to him.”
Eight hundred and forty eight hadith are narrated from him. He died in
Madinah in 33 AH just over sixty years old, and was buried in al-Baqi’.
3322

--- Page 47 ---
4. The Decree
then later he is a blood clot for the like of that, then later he is a
morsel of flesh for the like of that. Then the angel is sent to him
and breathes the spirit into him, and he is commanded with
four words: with writing his provision, his life-span, his action,
and whether he is happy or grievous. By Allah the One other
than Whom there is no god, one of you will do the actions of the
people of the Garden until there is only a cubit2 between him
and it, then the decree will overtake him, he will do the actions
of the people of the Fire and thus enter it. One of you will do
the actions of the people of the Fire until there only remains
a cubit between him and it, then the decree will overtake him,
he will do the actions of the people of the Garden and so enter
it’.” Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated it.
The Commentary
The saying of ‘Abdullah ibn Mas’ud, “And he is the truthful one
who is confirmed”, i.e. Allah bore witness that he is the truthful
one, and “confirmed” means he is trustworthy.
His saying @ “His creation is gathered in the belly of his
mother”, it is possible that what is meant by it is “The water of
the man and of the woman are united and the child is created
from the two of them”, as He said, exalted is He, “…created from
a spurting fluid.”3 It is possible that what is meant is that he is
gathered together from all of the body. That is because it is said
that the [sperm] drop in the first state courses in the woman’s
body for forty days, which are the days of craving. After that it is
collected and some of the dust of the child flows copiously over
it and it becomes transformed into a clot. Then it continues in
the second state and begins to grow larger until it becomes a
chewed morsel of flesh. It has been named thus because it is
the size of a piece of meat which is chewed. Then in the third
state Allah fashions that morsel and creates hearing, sight, smell
2 Dhira’ – a cubit is the length from the finger tips to the elbow.
3 Surat at-Tariq: 6.
3322 33

--- Page 48 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
and the mouth in it, and He fashions the intestines within it. He
said, exalted is He, “It is He who forms you in the womb however He
wills.”4 When the third stage is complete, and that is forty [days],
the child is four months old and the spirit is breathed into it.
Allah, exalted is He, says, “Mankind! if you are in any doubt about
the Rising, know that We created you from dust”5 meaning “your father
Adam” “then from a drop of sperm (nutfah)” meaning his (Adam’s)
descendants [are created from a drop whereas Adam was created
from dust] and the drop is the sperm – and its root is ‘little water’
and its plural in Arabic is nitaf – “then from a clot of blood”
which is thick congealed blood, and that drop of sperm becomes
thick blood, “then from a lump of flesh” which is a piece of meat
“formed yet unformed” about which Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Formed, i.e.
completed, and unformed, i.e. uncompleted, indeed deficient in
its creation.” Mujahid said, “Fashioned and unfashioned”, [the
latter] meaning the miscarried foetus.
Ibn Mas’ud î said, “When the drop is settled in the womb
the angel takes it in his palm and says, ‘O my Lord, formed or
unformed?’ And if He, exalted is He, says, ‘Unformed’ he casts
it into the womb as blood and it does not become a person. If
He says, ‘Formed’ then the angel says, ‘Is it male or female? Is it
happy or grievous? What is its provision and what is its life-span,
and in which land will it die?’ It will be said to him, ‘Go to the
Original of the Book, for you will find all of that in it.’ He will
go and will find it in the Original of the Book and write it until
it comes to the last description of it.” For this reason it is said,
“Happiness is [decreed] before birth”.
His saying @ “Then the decree will overtake him”, i.e. that
[decree] which preceded in knowledge, or that which preceded
in the Preserved Tablet, or that which preceded in the belly of the
mother, and we have already seen that there are four decrees.
His saying, “Until there is only a cubit between him and it” is
a metaphor by which is meant a piece of time at the end of his
life; it does not literally mean a cubit and that precise amount
4 Surah Al ‘Imran: 6.
5 Surat al-Hajj: 5.
3344

--- Page 49 ---
4. The Decree
of time, for when the disbeliever says, “There is no god but
Allah, Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah” then dies, he
enters the Garden. When the believer says at the end of his life
the word of disbelief, he enters the Fire. In the hadith there is
a proof that one must not make unequivocal statements about
[anyone] entering the Garden or the Fire, even if the person
does all sorts of right action or all sorts of wrong action, and
that one must not depend on one’s action nor be conceited
about it, since one does not know what is the seal [of one’s
destiny]. Everyone ought to ask Allah i for a good conclusion
[to their life], and seek refuge with Allah, exalted is He, from
an evil conclusion.
If it is said “Allah, exalted is He, says, ‘But as for those who have
iman and do right actions, We will not let the wage of good-doers go
to waste,’6 then the apparent meaning of the ayah is that right
action from a sincere person is accepted, and that if acceptance
has been obtained because of the promise of the Generous
One, then he is safe by that from an evil conclusion”, then the
answer has two aspects, one of which is that it is conditional
on acceptance and [the decree of] a good conclusion. It may
also possibly mean that whoever believes and is sincere in his
action will not have anything but a good conclusion [to his
life] and that the evil conclusion will only be for the one who
does wrong action or mixes it with right action mixed with
some form of showing off or seeking reputation, and another
hadith indicates this: “One of you will act with the actions
of the people of the Garden as it appears to people”, i.e. in
that which is apparent to them of the rightness of his outward
along with the corruption and foulness of his inward, and
Allah knows best.
In the hadith there is a proof that it is desirable to swear an
oath to emphasise a matter to people, and Allah, exalted is He,
swore, “By the Lord of heaven and earth, it is certainly the truth.”7
Allah, exalted is He, says, “Say, ‘Oh yes, by my Lord, you certainly will
6 Surat al-Kahf: 30.
7 Surat adh-Dhariyat: 23.
3344 35

--- Page 50 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
be raised again! And then you will be informed about what you did.’”8
Allah, exalted is He, knows best.
8 Surat at-Taghabun: 7.
36

--- Page 51 ---
5: Innovation
The Mother of the Believers, Umm ‘Abdullah ‘A’ishah1
ü said, “The Messenger of Allah @ said, ‘Whoever
introduces into this affair of ours that which is not of it,
1 She is known as the Siddiqah – the thoroughly truthful one – and she was
the daughter of the Siddiq, Abu Bakr î. She was given the surname of Mother
of the Believers by the Qur’an which named all the wives of the Prophet thus.
She was the most beloved of his wives after Khadijah, may Allah be pleased
with her. The Prophet @ married no other previously unmarried woman apart
from her. She was tremendously knowledgeable in fiqh, characterised by doing
36

--- Page 52 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
then it is rejected2’.” Al-Bukhari and Muslim related it, and in a
narration of Muslim’s there is, “Whoever does an act for which
there is no command of ours then it is rejected.”
Commentary
In his saying @ “Whoever introduces into this affair of ours
that which is not of it, then it is rejected,” there is an indication
that if the acts of worship, ghusl, wudu, fasting and prayer, are
performed in a manner which contradicts the shari’ah they are
returned to the one who performed them, and that which is
taken by a corrupt contract3 must be returned to its owner and
not taken possession of.
He @ said to someone who said to him, “My son was an employee
of this one and fornicated with his wife. I have been told that my
son must be stoned, so I have paid a ransom of two hundred
sheep and a slave-girl for him.” He @ said, “The slave-girl and the
sheep are rejected and returned to you.”
In it there is an indication that whoever innovates something
in the deen which does not accord with shari’ah4 then its guilt is
without in the world, generous, eloquent, and much given to fasting. The
Prophet @ advised us to take half of our deen from her.
Abu Musa al-Ash’ari î said, “No hadith ever showed us difficulty but that
when we asked ‘A’ishah about it we found that she had knowledge of it.”
Az-Zuhri said, “If the knowledge of ‘A’ishah had been gathered together
and the knowledge of all the wives of the Prophet @ and of all other women,
‘A’ishah’s knowledge would be greater.”
She narrated 1,210 hadith.
She died when she was sixty six years old and is buried in al-Baqi’.
2 Rejected – radd also has the sense of ‘returned’.
3 It is commonplace to regard innovations as being merely in the ‘religion’
which, in the post-colonial era, has been made of Islam, whereas Imam
an-Nawawi clarifies that contractual matters, which include commercial
transactions, have shari’ah forms.
4 This phrase necessarily implies, as was the position of Imam an-Nawawi,
that someone who innovates something in the deen which does accord with
the shari’ah has no guilt and his action is not rejected. Of course, this is an
issue only for people of knowledge with the necessary qualifications.
3388

--- Page 53 ---
5. Innovation
upon him and his action is rejected and returned to him, and
that he merits the threat.
He @ said, “Whoever introduces a new matter or gives shelter
to an innovator then the curse of Allah be upon him.”
One of the best works on bid’ah is the Ihya as-Sunnah wa Ikhmad al-Bid’ah
(Revival of the Sunnah and Destruction of Bid’ah) of Shaykh ‘Uthman dan
Fodio, may Allah show him mercy, in which he says, “My purpose is not to
rend those things which veil people [and their wrong actions] nor to become
occupied with their defects. Whoever’s purpose is to revive the Muhammadan
Sunnah and to destroy shaytanic bid’ah will expend himself in counselling
Muslims, and Allah is responsible for helping him. Whoever’s purpose is to
rend people’s veils [over their weaknesses and wrong actions] and to become
occupied with their defects, then Allah is his Reckoner and He will question
him, because whoever follows up the nakedness of his brother, then Allah will
follow up his nakedness and disgrace him even though right inside his own
house. The believer seeks excuses for [others’ behaviour] and the hypocrite
follows up defects. Allah helps the slave as long as the slave helps his brother.
There is in the Muwatta’, ‘Do not look into people’s wrong actions as if you
were lords, but look into your own wrong actions as if you were slaves’.”
3388 39

--- Page 54 ---
4400

--- Page 55 ---
6. The Halal and the Haram
6: The Halal and Haram
Abu ‘Abdullah an-Nu’man ibn Bashir1 ô said, “I heard
the Messenger of Allah @ saying, ‘The halal is clear and
the haram is clear and in between them are ambivalent
matters which many people do not know. Whoever guards
himself against ambivalent matters has secured his deen and
his honour. Whoever falls into ambivalent matters will fall into
the haram, like the shepherd who shepherds [his flock] around
forbidden pasturage, he is certain to pasture [his flock] in it.
Certainly, every king has his forbidden pasturage. Certainly,
Allah’s forbidden pasturage is the things He has forbidden.
Certainly in the body there is a lump of flesh which when it
is sound the whole body is sound and when it is corrupt the
whole body is corrupt. Certainly it is the heart’.” Al-Bukhari
and Muslim narrated it.
Commentary
His saying @ “‘The halal is clear and the haram is clear and in
between them are ambivalent matters …” The men of knowledge
differ as to the definition of the halal and the haram. Abu Hanifah
said, may Allah show him mercy, “The halal is that for which
there is a proof which shows that it is halal.” Ash-Shafi’i î said,
“The haram is that for which there is a proof which shows that it
is haram.”
His saying @ “and in between them are ambivalent matters…”,
1 He was born at the beginning of the fourteenth day after the Hijrah, and
his mother carried him to the Chosen One @ who asked for a date and chewed
it, then put it into his mouth. He was the first child born to the Ansar after
the arrival of the Prophet @ in Madinah. He learnt from the Prophet @ when
he was young and narrated what he learnt as hadith after his puberty. He was
appointed the amir of Kufa, he was the qadi of Damascus and Homs, and he
was one of the most gifted of those who gave the khutbah.
114 hadith have been narrated from him. He was assassinated at the age of
sixty four.
4400 41

--- Page 56 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
i.e. between them there are matters which resemble the halal
and the haram [so that it is not clear what they are]. Where
the ambivalence is absent, then disapproval [of that matter] is
absent and to ask [further] about it is an innovation. That is [for
example] when a stranger comes with goods that he is selling,
it is not necessary to make enquiry into it, indeed it is not even
desirable, and it is disapproved to ask about it.
His saying @ “Whoever guards himself against ambivalent
matters has secured his deen and his honour,” i.e. he has sought
to have his deen free of any blame and safe from any uncertainty.
As for the freedom of his honour from blame, if he does not give
[the ambivalent matter] up, stupid people would show arrogance
towards him by backbiting, and they would attribute to him that
he consumed the haram, and he would then be a decisive factor
in their falling into wrong action. It has been narrated that he
@ said, “Whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day let him not
take a stance that causes suspicion.”2 There is that ‘Ali î said,
“Beware of that which hearts reject even if you have an excuse
for it, because perhaps you will be unable to make a listener who
rejects [your action] listen to [your] excuse.” In Sahih at-Tirmidhi
there is that he @ said, “When any of you breaks wind in the
prayer, let him take hold of his nose and then leave.” That is so
that it won’t be said about him, “He broke wind.”
His saying @ “Whoever falls into ambivalent matters will fall
into the haram,” may mean two things, one of which is that he
will fall into the haram thinking that it is not haram. The second
is that the meaning would be that he would almost fall into the
haram, as is said, “Acts of disobedience are the postal service of
disbelief,” because when a person falls into infringements, he
will advance step by step from one corruption to another greater
than it. There is an indication of that in His words, exalted is He,
“and (the Children of Isra’il) killed the Prophets without any
right to do so. That was because they disobeyed and went beyond
the limits,”3 meaning that they went step by step from acts of
2 According to ‘A’ishah.
3 Surah Ali ‘Imran: 112.
4422

--- Page 57 ---
6. The Halal and the Haram
disobedience to killing the prophets. In the hadith there is, “May
Allah curse the thief who steals an egg and so his hand is cut
off, and who then steals a rope and his [other] hand is cut off,”4
i.e. he will go a step at a time from the egg and the rope [until
he is up] to the hilt in theft. The forbidden pasturage (hima) is
that grass on permitted land which the other person guards.
Whoever pastures [his flocks] around a protected pasturage, his
cattle will come close to falling within it and thus to pasture in
that which the other person has guarded, as opposed to when he
pastures his camels far from the protected pasturage.
Know that every forbidden thing has its protected pasturage
surrounding it. The private parts are forbidden and the two
thighs are their protected pasturage because they are a sanctum
(harim) for that which is forbidden. Similarly, seclusion with a
woman [other than wives, slave-women or family] is the protected
zone around that which is forbidden, so that a person must avoid
both that which is forbidden and the protected zone around it.
That which is forbidden is forbidden for its own sake, and the
protected forbidden zone is forbidden because steps are taken
by it towards the forbidden.5
His saying @ “Certainly in the body there is a lump of flesh…”
i.e. in the body there is a morsel of flesh which, when it has
humility then the limbs have humility, and when it is directed
then the limbs are directed, and when it is corrupt then the
limbs are corrupt. The people of knowledge said that the body
is the kingdom of the self and its city. The heart is in the middle
of the kingdom. The members are like servants, and the inner
faculties are like landed estates of the city. The intellect is like a
concerned wazir (minister) who advises him (the king). Appetite
is a seeker of the servants’ provisions. Anger is a policeman and
a foul cunning slave who assumes the aspect of a counsellor, but
whose advice is deadly poison, and whose untiring habit is always
to quarrel with the counselling wazir. The faculty of imagination
is at the front of the brain like a treasurer, the faculty of thought
4 Narrated by al-Bukhari and Muslim.
5 In fiqh this principle is referred to as sadd adh-dhar’i.
4422 43

--- Page 58 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
is in the middle of the brain, and the faculty of memory is in the
rear of the brain. The tongue is an interpreter. The five senses
are spies. Each one of them has been entrusted with making
one of the arts, so the eye has been entrusted with the world of
colours, hearing with the world of voices, and so on for all the
others, for they are means of information. Then it is said that
they are doorkeepers which bring that which they have grasped
to the self. It has been said that hearing, sight and the faculty of
smell are like capabilities from which the self looks. The heart is
the king, so that if the shepherd is sound, the flock will be sound,
and if he is corrupt, the flock will be corrupt. His soundness is
only obtained by his safety from inner sicknesses such as malice,
spite, greed, miserliness, pride, ridicule, showing off, seeking
reputation, deceit, covetousness, ambition, and discontent with
the decree. There are many illnesses of the heart amounting to
almost forty, may Allah heal us of them and make us of those
who come to Him with a sound healthy heart.
4444

--- Page 59 ---
17: Sincerity
Abu Ruqayyah Tamim ibn Aws ad-Dari1 î narrated that
the Prophet @ said, “The deen is sincerity.”2 We said, “For
whom?” He said, “For Allah, His Book, His Messenger,
the leaders of the Muslims and their generality.” Muslim
narrated it.
1 He accepted Islam î nine years after the Hijrah. He was one of the most
renowned and best of the companions, and attended battles with the Messenger
of Allah @. He stood at night in prayer with much recitation of Qur’an. He used
to complete the recitation of Qur’an in one rak’ah, and sometimes he would
repeat one ayah all night until the morning.
Tamim moved to Sham from Madinah after the murder of ‘Uthman î where
he dwelt in Jerusalem and where he died in 40 AH and was buried in Bait Jibril,
one of the districts of Khalil (Hebron). Eighteen hadith are narrated from
him.
2 An-naseehah means both sincerity and good advice.
4444 45

--- Page 60 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
Commentary
His saying @ “The deen is sincerity… for Allah, His Book, His
Messenger, the leaders of the Muslims and their generality.”
Al-Khattabi said, “Nasihah is a comprehensive word whose
meaning is ‘the collecting together of a portion of good for
the one who is counselled’.” It has been said that nasihah is
derived from a man’s sewing (nash) his robe excellently well,
so they make a comparison with the action of one who sews,
[comparing] that benefit which he [the counsellor] aimed at for
the one he advised with his [the one who sews] closing up gaps
and tears in the robe. It has also been said that it is derived from
the clarification (nash) of honey when one purifies it of wax, so
they made a comparison with the purification of speech from
deception with the purification of honey from admixture.
The people of knowledge say that as for sincerity to Allah,
exalted is He, its meaning refers to affirmation of Allah and
negation of any partner with Him, abandoning deviations
with respect to His attributes, describing Him with all
attributes of perfection and majesty, purifying Him, glorious
is He and exalted, from every type of shortcoming and defect,
undertaking His obedience, avoiding His disobedience, love
for His sake and hatred for His sake, affection for whoever
obeys Him and enmity for whoever disobeys Him, jihad against
whoever disbelieves Him, acknowledgement of His blessing and
gratitude to Him for it, sincerity in all affairs, calling towards
and urging all the above-mentioned qualities, and gentleness
with all people or with whomever possible of them. The reality
of these qualities returns to the slave in his advising himself,
and Allah, exalted is He, is in no need of the sincerity of those
who are sincere.
As for sincerity for the Book of Allah, exalted is He, it is
affirmation that it is the speech of Allah, exalted is He, and His
revelation which nothing of people’s speech resembles, and the
like of which no one among creation is capable, then honouring
it and reciting it as it should be recited, beautifying it, having
4466

--- Page 61 ---
7. Sincerity
humility with it, reciting its letters correctly, defending it from
the esoteric interpretations of deviants and the opposition of
those who refute it, affirmation of what is in it, standing by
its rulings, coming to understand its sciences and metaphors,
considering its admonitions with respect, reflecting on its
wonders, acting on its unambiguous statements and accepting
its ambiguous ones, research into its general and specific
statements and its abrogating and abrogated [ayat], spreading
its sciences, inviting others to it and to that which we have
mentioned of its good counsel.
As for sincerity to His Messenger @ it is affirmation of him for
the message, affirmation of everything that he brought, obeying
him in his command and in his prohibition, helping him in
his life and after his death, showing enmity to whoever shows
enmity to him and friendship to whoever shows friendship to
him, exalting his right and showing respect for him, bringing
his way and his sunnah to life, spreading his da’wah and his
sunnah, rejecting any suspicion about it and spreading its
sciences and becoming learned in the fiqh of it, calling others
to it, showing gentleness in learning and teaching it, exalting
it and acknowledging its majesty, showing courtesy when
reading about it, avoiding talking about it without knowledge,
honouring its people because of their relationship to it, taking
on its qualities of character and its courtesies, love for the
people of his house and his companions, and avoidance of
whoever innovates in his sunnah or shows opposition to anyone
of his companions and the like of that.
As for sincerity towards the leaders of the Muslims, it is
cooperating with them for the truth and obeying them for it,
commanding, forbidding and reminding them with gentleness,
informing them of that which they neglect and of the Muslims’
rights which have not reached them, not rising against them,
and uniting the hearts of the Muslims in obedience to them.
Al-Khattabi said, “Part of sincerity towards them is to pray
behind them, to wage jihad along with them, to pay the zakah to
them, not to rise against them with the sword if there appear to
4466 47

--- Page 62 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
be injustices or bad behaviour from them, not to persist in false
praise of them, and to supplicate for right action for them.”3
Ibn Battal said, may Allah show him mercy, “In this hadith
there is a proof that sincerity (naseehah) is called ‘deen’ and
‘Islam’, and that deen signifies action just as it signifies words.”
He said, “Sincere counsel is an obligation which is fulfilled by
whoever undertakes it and therefore is no longer required of the
rest.” He said, “Sincere counsel is a duty to the extent of one’s
ability when the one who is counselling knows that his advice
will be accepted, his command obeyed and he himself is safe
from calamity. If he fears harm then he is at liberty [not to advise
or counsel], and Allah, exalted is He, knows best.”
3 ‘Imam’ can be misunderstood as the imam of the prayer which is not
the primary meaning intended. Properly the Imam is the Muslim ruler who
receives the allegiance of the Muslims living within the Dar al-Islam according
to the Sunnah of the Prophet @ and of the Khulafa’ who took the right way ô
and thus it means the Khalifah. He either leads the prayers himself or appoints
those who lead the prayers.
It must be noted that through much of history there has not been a single
undivided Muslim Ummah ruled by one khalifah, but sometimes remote lands,
such as Andalusia under the historical Murabitun and the Mughal Empire
under Aurangzeb, have often pledged allegiance to the Khalifah of the time
even though it was physically impossible for him to rule and govern their lands
directly.
Shehu Uthman dan Fodio of Nigeria, may Allah have mercy on him, took
the position that there may be more than one khalifah at the same time if
their territories are far enough apart that there does not arise a clash between
them.
Ibn Juzayy says in al-Qawanin al-Fiqhiyyah:
“The pre-conditions of the Imamate (i.e. the khalifate) are eight: Islam,
maturity (puberty), intellect (i.e. sanity), maleness, justice, knowledge,
competence, and that his descent should be from Quraysh, but on this [last]
there is a difference of opinion, so that if people agree [on pledging allegiance]
to one who does not meet all of the conditions then it is permitted, from fear of
causing dissension and sedition.
“It is not permitted to rise up against the people in authority even if they are
tyrannical, unless they openly display clear disbelief. It is obligatory to obey
them in whatever a man loves and dislikes, unless they order disobedience [of
Allah and His Messenger] for there is no obedience due to a creature if it
involves disobedience to the Creator.”
4488

--- Page 63 ---
7. Sincerity
If someone says, “In Sahih al-Bukhari there is that he @ said,
‘If any of you seeks advice from his brother let him advise him,’
which indicates that the duty [of giving counsel] is conditional
on the request for advice and is not an unqualified [obligation],
and that understanding the precondition is a proof that the
general statement has a particular meaning”, then the answer
is that it is possible to understand it in that way with respect to
worldly affairs such as marrying a woman or transacting with a
man, etc., and the first [hadith] is interpreted to be of a general
nature in the affairs of the deen which are obligatory duties on
every Muslim, and Allah, exalted is He, knows best.
4488 49

--- Page 64 ---
8: fighting
Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with both of them, narrated
that the Messenger of Allah @ said, “I have been commanded
to fight people until they witness that there is no god but
Allah and that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, and they
establish the prayer and pay the zakah. Then if they do that they
are safe from me with respect to their blood and their property
except for the right of Islam, and their reckoning is up to Allah,
exalted is He.” Al-Bukhari and Muslim.
50

--- Page 65 ---
8. Fighting
Commentary
His saying @ “I have been commanded…”, in it there is a proof
that the unqualified nature of the command and its form mean
that it is an obligation [not a recommendation].
If it is said about his saying @ “Then if they do that they are safe
from me with respect to their blood and their property…” that
the fast is one of the pillars of Islam and similarly the Hajj, and
yet he did not mention them, the answer is that a person is not
fought over the fast [if he fails to fast] rather he is imprisoned
and denied food and water. As for the Hajj, it has ample time
[in which it can be undertaken] so that one is not fought over it.
The Messenger of Allah @ only mentioned these three because
one is fought for abandoning them, and for this reason he didn’t
mention the fast and the Hajj to Mu’adh when he sent him to the
Yemen, rather he reminded him of these three in particular.
As for his saying @ “…except for the right of Islam…,”one of
the rights of Islam is the performance of the obligations, and
whoever gives up the obligations it is permitted to fight [him],
such as rebels, brigands, the assailant, the one who refuses [to
pay] zakah, one who refuses to give water to one in dire need
and to domestic animals, criminals, the one who refuses to
pay a debt even though capable of it, the adulterer, and the
one who abandons the jumu’ah and wudu’. In these conditions
it is permitted to kill him and to fight him, and similarly if he
abandons the [prayer in] congregation. We say that it is an
individual obligation or an obligation binding on the community
[which if some people perform it the community is freed of any
wrong for not having done it].
His saying @ “And their reckoning is up to Allah,” means that
whoever produces the two shahadahs, establishes the prayer and
produces the zakah is protected with respect to his blood and
his property. If he has done that with a pure intention he is a
believer, and if he has done it dissembling and out of fear of the
sword, for example the hypocrite, then his reckoning is up to
50 51

--- Page 66 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
Allah and He is in charge of the innermost thoughts. Similarly
one who performs the prayer without wudu’ or without having
performed ghusl after sexual intercourse, or he eats in his house
and claims that he is fasting [Ramadan], that is accepted from
him and his reckoning is up to Allah, mighty is He and majestic,
and Allah knows best.
52

--- Page 67 ---
9. That which I forbid you…
Abu Hurairah ‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn Sakhr 1 î said, “I
heard the Messenger of Allah @ saying, ‘That which I
forbid you, avoid it, and that which I command you, do
of it what you are able, for the only thing that destroyed the
ones who were before you was their great numbers of questions
1 He came to Madinah in 7 AH while the Messenger @ was at Khaibar,
and so he went to him, accepted Islam from him and clung to his company
devotedly, out of his desire for knowledge. He was the Companion who
narrated the most hadith, i.e. 5,374. It is said that ‘Umar î appointed him
governor of Bahrain and then later removed him. Later on again he sought
to entice him back to the governorship and he refused and repented of the
amirate. He lived in Madinah until he died in 57 at the end of the khalifate of
Mu’awiyyah î when he was seventy-eight years old. He is buried in al-Baqi’.
52

--- Page 68 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
and their disagreements with their prophets.’” Al-Bukhari and
Muslim narrated it.
Commentary
His saying @ “That which I forbid you, avoid it,” that is, avoid
it all at once, and do not do it, not even a bit of it. This is of
course in the case of a prohibition of something because it is
haram. As for the prohibition of something in the sense of it
being disapproved, then it is permitted to do it. The root of nahy
(prohibition) linguistically is man ‘prevention’.
Concerning his saying @ “And that which I command you, do
of it that which you are able”, there are some issues of which
there is, for example, that if one finds water for wudu’ but it is
not sufficient, then the most obvious thing is to use it and then
perform tayammum for whatever remains [undone]. If one finds
only part of a measure (a sa’) of grain or other foods for [zakah]
al-fitrah then one must pay that. A consequence of it too is that if
one finds only a part of that which suffices for expenditure on a
relative, a wife or a domestic animal, it is obligatory to spend it
[on them]. This is in contrast [to the case] where one found only
a part of a slave [because one had only part ownership] it is not
necessary to free him for the expiation of a wrong action, since
expiation has an alternative which is fasting.
His saying @ “For the only thing that destroyed the ones who
were before you was their great numbers of questions and their
disagreements with their prophets.” Know that there are different
degrees of questioning, the first of which is the questioning of
an ignorant person about the obligations of the deen, such as
wudu’, prayer, fasting and rulings of ordinary transactions, etc.
This type of questioning is obligatory for him according to his
saying @ “Seeking knowledge is obligatory for every Muslim male
and female.”2 It is not acceptable for somebody to be silent about
2 Al-Bayhaqi narrated it in Shu’ab al-Iman.
5544

--- Page 69 ---
9. “That which I forbid you…”
that. Allah, exalted is He, says, “Ask the People of the Reminder if
you do not know.”3 Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with both of
them, said, “I was given a questioning tongue and an intelligent
heart.” That was how he himself expressed it about himself, may
Allah be pleased with him.
The second division is asking in order to become discerning
(faqih) in the deen, not just for the sake of action alone, for
example, for judgements and fatwas, and this is a collective
obligation because of His words, exalted is He, “If a party from
each group of them were to go out so they could increase their knowledge
of the deen”.4 He @ said, “Let the one who is present teach the one
who is absent.”5
The third division is that one asks about something which Allah
has not imposed as a duty on one nor on anyone else, and this is
the case referred to in this hadith, because there may be in the
question a consequent difficulty because of the responsibility
which results, and for this reason he said @ “And He was silent
about some things as a mercy to you, so do not ask about them.”
It is narrated from ‘Ali î that when “Hajj to the House is a duty
owed to Allah by all mankind – those who can find a way to do it”6 was
revealed, a man said, “Every year, Messenger of Allah?” He @
turned away from him until he repeated the question twice or
three times, so the Messenger of Allah @ said, “I am not about
to say yes. By Allah, if I said yes, it would become an obligation,
and if it became an obligation you would not be able to do it.
Leave me alone as long I leave you alone, for the only thing that
destroyed the ones who were before you was their great numbers
of questions and their disagreements with their prophets. When
I command you to do something, do what you can of it. When
I forbid you something, avoid it,” and so Allah, exalted is He,
revealed, “You who believe do not ask about matters which if
they were made known to you would make things difficult for
3 Surat an-Nahl: 43.
4 Surat at-Tawbah: 122.
5 Part of a hadith narrated by al-Bukhari and Muslim.
6 Surah Ali ‘Imran: 98.
5544 55

--- Page 70 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
you.”7 i.e. “[which] I have not commanded you to do”. This
command [in the ayah] is particular to his epoch @. As for after
the establishment of the shari’ah and security from any increase
in it, the prohibition lapsed with the lapse of a reason for it.8
A group of the first community disapproved of asking about
the meanings of ambivalent ayats. Malik, may Allah, exalted is
He, show him mercy, said [when asked by a man in an assembly]
about His saying, exalted is He, “The All-Merciful, established firmly
upon the Throne,”9 he said, “The firm establishment is known, its
manner is unknown, affirmation of it is obligatory, and asking
about it is an innovation, and I see you as an evil man. Eject
him from my company.” One of them said, “The way of the first
community (salaf) is safer, and the way of the later communities
(khalaf) is more learned, and that is questioning.”
7 Surat al-Ma’idah: 101.
8 There are no prophets who could now amend it.
9 Surah Ta-Ha: 4.
5566

--- Page 71 ---
5566 57

--- Page 72 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
10: Pure Wholesome Food
Abu Hurairah î said, “The Messenger of Allah @ said,
‘Allah, exalted is He, is pure1 and only accepts that
which is pure. Allah ordered the believers with that with
which he ordered the Messengers, and He said, exalted is He,
“Messengers, eat of the good things and act rightly”2 and He said,
exalted is He, “You who have iman! eat of the good things We have
provided for you”3,’ and then he mentioned a dishevelled dusty
man lengthening his journey and stretching out his hands to
the sky, ‘Lord, Lord!’ and his food is haram, his drink haram,
his clothing haram, he has been fed on the haram, so how can
he be answered?” Muslim narrated it.
Commentary
His saying @ “Allah, exalted is He, is pure (tayyib)”. It is narrated
from ‘A’ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, that she said, “I
heard the Messenger of Allah @ saying, ‘O Allah, I ask You by
Your blessed, wholesome, pure, purifying name which is most
beloved to You, the one which when You are supplicated by it You
respond, and when You are asked by it You give, and when You
are sought mercy by it You show mercy, and when You are sought
to dispel worries by it You dispel worries.”
The meaning of tayyib – ‘pure’ – is ‘free of defects and foul
matters’, so that it has the meaning of [the Divine name]
al-Quddus ‘The Wholly Pure’. It has been said, “Sweet of praise
and the most delicious of the Names to the ones who have gnosis
1 Tayyib, translated as ‘good’, means literally ‘pure, wholesome, sweet,
fragrant’ and derives from the same root as ‘teeb’ which is a perfume, so
that tayyib has the sense of ‘fragrant’ a meaning which is reinforced by its
opposition in the Qur’an to khabeeth, translated variously as ‘bad’, etc., which
means ‘foul’, ‘malodorous’ or ‘stinking’.
2 Surat al-Muminun: 52.
3 Surat al-Baqarah: 171.
5588

--- Page 73 ---
10. Pure Wholesome Food
of them”. He made His slaves pure to enter the Garden through
right actions and made them [the right actions] seem pure and
good for them. Al-kalimah at-tayyibah ‘the wholesome word’ is
“There is no god but Allah”.
His saying @ “And He only accepts that which is pure,” i.e. one
cannot draw near to Him by giving something haram as sadaqah
(i.e. zakah or optional generosity),4 and it is disliked to give
spoiled food as sadaqah, such as worm-eaten old grain. Similarly
it is disliked to give sadaqah of that in which there is some doubt
[as to its purity or its status in the shari’ah]. Allah, exalted is He,
says, “Do not have recourse to bad things when you give…”.5 Just as
He, exalted is He, does not accept [sadaqah]6 from anything but
that which is pure, similarly He does not accept any actions but
those which are pure and free from the pollution of showing off,
conceit, and seeking reputation, etc.
In his saying may Allah bless him and grant him peace, “He
said, exalted is He, ‘You Messengers, eat of the pure things and do
right action’ and He said, exalted is He, ‘You who believe, eat of the
pure things with which We have provided you’,” what is meant here
by ‘pure things’ is those which are halal.7 In the hadith there is
a proof that a person is rewarded for what he eats if he intends
by it to strengthen himself for obedience, or to revive himself –
which is one of the duties – as opposed to when he eats purely
out of appetite and to enjoy himself.
His saying @ “and his food is haram, his drink haram, his
clothing haram, and he has been fed (ghudhiya) on the haram”,
4 Sadaqah is used Qur’anically and in hadith and works of fiqh for zakah.
5 Surat al-Baqarah: 267.
6 Thus zakah and voluntary sadaqah may not be paid with anything which is
acquired usuriously, or with a usurious instrument such as a banknote whose
origin is as the record of a debt – “I promise to pay the bearer on demand…”
since one cannot pay zakah with a debt. Paper money’s present reality is as
fiat money created out of nothing by a small banking elite for the purpose of
their own expropriation of the wealth of the planet. It is said that now some 3-4
hundred families own half of the wealth of the planet.
7 It implies too that an essential quality of the halal is that it is pure. The
word halal is often qualified in the Qur’an by the word tayyib.
5588 59

--- Page 74 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
i.e. [ghudhiya means that] he has eaten to satiety, and it is with
a dammah (u) on the ghayn with a diacritical point, and a kasrah
(i) on the dhal with a diacritical point, without a shaddah (i.e.
without a doubling of the dhal) from al-ghidha which has kasrah
(i) [on the ghayn] and an alif maqsurah. As for ghadaa’ with a
fathah (a) [on the ghayn] and a madd (an extenuation of the
second vowel) and a dal without a diacritical point, it refers to
the same food which is eaten in the early morning (ghadaa’)8:
Allah, exalted is He, says, “He said to his servant, ‘Bring us our
morning meal (ghadaa’)’.”9
His saying @ “so how can he be answered?” i.e. deeming it
unlikely that there should be acceptance or a response to [his]
supplication. For this reason al-‘Abbadi stipulated that for a
supplication to be accepted one must eat halal food, but the
truth is that that is not a precondition, because He responded
to the worst of His creation,10 Iblis, and said, “You are one of the
reprieved.”11
8 There can be a certain amount of confusion here, because there are
two different Arabic roots, which have slightly different usages classically
and in modern times. With the letter dal, the word refers to a complex of
meanings to do with ‘in the morning’ and ‘tomorrow’, and thus gives ghadaa’
meaning ‘early morning’ and which is a name of the meal eaten at that time,
i.e. ‘breakfast’, but it is ordinarily used in modern Arabic for the meal eaten
after the midday prayer, i.e. ‘lunch’. With the letter dhal, the word largely
refers to nourishment and feeding.
9 Surat al-Kahf: 62.
10 If Allah answered the supplication of Iblis whom He cursed, then He is
free to answer the supplication of a kafir, and certainly that of a Muslim who
has eaten something haram.
11 Surat al-A’raf: 14.
6600

--- Page 75 ---
11: Doubt
Abu Muhammad al-Hasan1 ibn ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib the
grandchild of the Messenger of Allah @ and his offspring,
may Allah be pleased with both of them, there is that he
said, “I memorised from the Messenger of Allah @ ‘Abandon
1 The son of Fatimah az-Zahra, may Allah be pleased with her, he was
born in Madinah in 3 AH. He was a year older than his brother al-Husein. He
performed the Hajj twenty-five times. Al-Hasan was appointed to the Khilafah
after his father and held it in the Hijaz, Yemen, Iraq and Khurasan for six
months. Then his noble and generous character, his forbearance and his
caution called him to leave the Khalifate to Mu’awiyyah î out of compassion
for the Muslims since they had suffered a great deal from the civil war between
‘Ali and Mu’awiyyah, may Allah be pleased with both of them. It is important to
realise that he is the link between the Khulafa ar-Rashidun ô and the Umayyads
to whom he legitimately transferred the khilafah.
He died in Madinah by poisoning in 50 AH. A more substantial biographical
outline is to be found in as-Suyuti’s Tarikh al-Khulafa, from which the chapters
on the Khulafa ar-Rashidun have been translated and published as The History
of the Khalifahs who took the right way, Ta-Ha Publishing Ltd., London.
6600 61

--- Page 76 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
that which gives you doubt for that which gives you no doubt’.”
At-Tirmidhi and an-Nasa’i narrated it and at-Tirmidhi said, “A
good sahih hadith.”
Commentary
In his saying @ “Abandon that which gives you doubt for that
which gives you no doubt,” there is a proof that the person of
taqwa2 ought not to consume3 property about which there is
some doubt, just as it is forbidden him to consume that which
is haram.
His saying, “that which gives you no doubt,” i.e. turn to that
food in which there is no doubt and with which the heart is at
ease and about which the self is tranquil. We have already spoken
about ambiguity and ambivalence.
2 Ibn Juzayy said, in his dictionary of linguistic meanings of words
in Qur’an, “Taqwa’s meaning is fear, clinging to obedience to Allah and
abandoning disobedience to Him. It is the sum of all good.” Kitab at-tashil li
‘ulum at-tanzil.
3 Literally ‘eat’. It is appropriate to mention here that the salaf were as
concerned about eating food bought with halal money, as they were about
‘halal food’ as understood by modern Muslims. They were cautious about
accepting the money or eating the food of someone who had acquired his
wealth unlawfully, for example the money which derived from the forceful
expropriation of an Amir or through illegal taxes, or through usury.
A second point that is worth mentioning is that this hadith has a much wider
relevance in fiqh than just in the domain of food and drink. For example, when
a man has a doubt as to whether he has prayed three or four raka’at for dhuhr,
then he prays another so that he is certain that he has prayed at least four,
and then he performs two extra prostrations after the salam. That is another
restricted fiqh example, and the hadith has a guidance which is vaster than
that.
6622

--- Page 77 ---
12: Leaving what does not concern one
Abu Hurairah î said, “The Messenger of Allah @ said,
‘A part of the excellence of a man’s Islam is his leaving
alone what does not concern him’.” At-Tirmidhi and
others relate it like this.
Commentary
His saying @ “‘A part of the excellence of a man’s Islam is his
leaving alone what does not concern him,” i.e. those words and
deeds which are of no importance to him, of the business of the
deen and of the world.
He said @ to Abu Dharr when he asked him about the scrolls of
Ibrahim, “They were all proverbs. There was in them, ‘Bedazzled
ruler! I did not send you to collect possessions one on top of
another, but I sent you to avert the supplication of the wronged
6622 63

--- Page 78 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
person from reaching Me, for I do not reject it even if it comes
from a disbeliever’. There was in them, ‘The intelligent man, as
long as his intelligence has not been overcome, must have four
hours: an hour in which he holds intimate discourse with his
Lord [in prayer and supplication], an hour in which he reflects
on the handiwork of Allah, exalted is He, an hour in which he
speaks with himself [and resolves or makes up his mind], and
an hour in which he is in solitary retreat with the Possessor of
Majesty and Honour, and that hour will be a help to him for
those hours’. In it there was, ‘The intelligent man, as long as
his intelligence has not been overcome, must not exert himself
except for three things: taking provision for the Final Abode,
taking some trouble to earn a living, and pleasure in something
which is not haram’. In it there was, ‘The intelligent man, as long
as his intelligence has not been overcome, must have insight into
his epoch, occupy himself with his affair and guard his tongue,
and whoever reckons his speech to be a part of his action will not
be about to speak except on what concerns him’.”
I [Abu Dharr] said, “By my father and mother [may you be
ransomed], what was there in the scrolls of Musa?” He said, “They
were all admonitions. In them there was: ‘How astonishing is one
who is certain of the Fire, how can he laugh? How astonishing is
one who is sure of death, how can he rejoice? How astonishing is
one who sees the world and its overturning its people, how can
he be at ease in it? How astonishing is one who is certain of the
decree and then becomes angry! And how astonishing is one
who is sure of the reckoning and does not act!’”
I said, “By my father and mother [may you be ransomed], does
anything remain from that which was in their scrolls?” He said,
“Yes, Abu Dharr, ‘He who has purified himself will have success…’ to
the end of the Surah.1”
I said, “By my father and mother [may you be ransomed], advise
1 Surat al-A’la: 13-16. “He who has purified himself will have success, He who
invokes the Name of his Lord and prays. Yet still you prefer the life of the dunya when
the akhirah is better and longer lasting. This is certainly in the earlier texts, the texts of
Ibrahim and Musa.”
6644

--- Page 79 ---
12. Leaving what does not concern one
me.” He said, “I advise you to have taqwa of Allah, for it is the head
of all of your affair.” He said, “I said, ‘Increase me!’” He said, “You
must recite (tilawah2) the Qur’an and remember Allah a great
deal, because He remembers you in Heaven.” I said, “Increase
me!” He said, “You must wage jihad for it is the monasticism
of believers.” I said, “Increase me!” He said, “You must take to
silence because it will repel shaytans from you and it will be a
help to you in the matter of your deen.” I said, “Increase me!” He
said, “Say the truth even if it is bitter.” I said, “Increase me!” He
said, “Do not let the blame affect you for the sake of Allah of any
who blame.” I said, “Increase me!” He said, “Join relationships
with your maternal kin even if they sever relationships with you.”
I said, “Increase me!” He said, “Sufficient evil for a man is that
of himself of which he is ignorant, and that which he undertakes
which does not concern him. Abu Dharr, there is no intelligence
like thoughtful consideration, no caution like restraint and no
excellence like excellence of character.”3
2 Tilawah in Arabic signifies ‘reciting, perusing and acting upon’. It comes
from a root meaning ‘to follow’ or to ‘imitate’.
3 Ibn Hibban narrated it in his Sahih.
6644 65

--- Page 80 ---
13: Loving for one’s brother
Abu Hamzah Anas ibn Malik1 î the servant of the
Messenger of Allah @ narrated that the Prophet @ said,
“None of you believes until he loves for his brother what
he loves for himself.” Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated it.
1 When the Messenger of Allah @ came to Madinah, Anas’ mother came
to the Messenger of Allah @ with her son Anas and said to him, “Messenger of
Allah take this one as a boy to serve you,” and he accepted him. He was then
ten years old and he continued to serve him until he died @ and he was at that
time well pleased with him.
He went on eight expeditions to battle with the Messenger of Allah @.
He continued to reside in Madinah and witnessed the great conquests of
the Companions, being himself present in battle. He used to pray optional
prayers and stand in them a great deal. When he concluded a recitation of the
Qur’an he would gather his family together and make a supplication for them.
Later he resided in Basra where he died in 93 AH, and he was the last of the
Companions to die in Basra. 2,286 hadith are narrated from him.
6666

--- Page 81 ---
13. Loving for one’s brother
Commentary
With respect to his saying @ “None of you believes until he
loves for his brother what he loves for himself,” the first thing to
be said is that it should be interpreted in terms of the universality
of brotherhood2 even to the extent of encompassing disbelievers
and Muslims. One loves for one’s disbelieving brother what one
loves for oneself: his entrance into Islam, just as one loves for
one’s Muslim brother his continuance in Islam. For this reason
supplication for a disbeliever’s guidance is recommended. The
hadith proves the incompleteness of the iman of whoever does
not love for his brother what he loves for himself.
What is meant by ‘love’ is ‘willing good and benefit’, moreover
what is meant is love in terms of the deen and not human love,
for human nature may dislike [another’s] attainment of good
and another’s being distinguished over oneself. Man must
oppose human nature, supplicate for his brother and wish for
him that for which he himself wishes. If a person does not love
for his brother what he loves for himself he is envious. Envy, as
al-Ghazali said, is in three divisions:
First, wishing for the removal of another’s blessing and one’s
own attainment of it.
Second, that one wishes for the removal of another’s
blessing even if one does not oneself gain it, such as when
one [already] has the like of it, or one does not even like it
[the blessing and want it for oneself], and this is worse than
the first.
Third, that one does not wish the removal of another’s
blessing but one dislikes his elevation above one in good
fortune and in rank, and is contented only with equality
[between oneself and the other] and is not pleased with any
extra [the other might have over one], and this too is forbidden
2 The Imam is making no equation between the sense of brotherhood here
outlined and the Masonic doctrine of the brotherhood of man which achieved
its ironic apogee in the French Revolution with the removal of thousands of
heads to the accompaniment of the cry Liberté, Égalité, Fraternité.
6666 67

--- Page 82 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
because one is not contented with the apportioning of Allah,
exalted is He. Allah, exalted is He, says, “Is it, then, they who
allocate the mercy of your Lord? We have allocated…”3 Whoever
is not pleased with the allocation [of blessings which Allah,
exalted is He, has made] opposes Allah, exalted is He, in His
apportioning and His wisdom. Man must master his self and
bring it to contentment with the Decree, and oppose it by
making supplication for his enemy in a way which opposes
the self.
3 Surat az-Zukhruf: 32: “Is it, then, they who allocate the mercy of your Lord? We
have allocated their livelihood among them in the life of the dunya and raised some of
them above others in rank so that some of them are subservient to others.” This is a clear
refutation of those who declare that Islam requires equality between people, a
doctrine deriving from the French Revolution’s ‘Égalité’.
6688

--- Page 83 ---
14. The sanctity of a Muslim’s blood
Abu Mas’ud î said, “The Messenger of Allah @ said, ‘The
blood of a Muslim man is not permitted [to be shed]
except for one of three: the adulterous mature person
[who is or has been married], a person [killed in retaliation]
for [the killing of] a person, and one who abandons his deen
and separates himself from the community.” Al-Bukhari and
Muslim narrated it.
Commentary
By his saying @ “ath-thayyib az-zani – the adulterous mature
person,” is meant someone who marries, has intercourse in a
6688 69

--- Page 84 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
valid marriage and then commits adultery after that, for he is to
be stoned, even if he is not married at the time of the adultery,
because of his having the attribute of being muhsan (i.e. having
married and consummated a marriage).
His saying @ “a person [killed in retaliation] for [killing] a
person”, i.e. [homicide] with the precondition of equality, for a
Muslim is not killed for [killing] a disbeliever, nor a free man for
[killing] a slave according to the Shafi’is but not the Hanafis.
His saying @ “and someone who abandons his deen and separates
himself from the community”, who is a renegade and refuge is
sought with Allah [from such a thing happening]. He may attach
himself to a community, like a Jew who becomes a Christian and
vice-versa; he is not killed because he has abandoned his deen
although he has not separated himself from the community. On
this there are two sayings the most sound of which is that he is not
killed, on the contrary he is classed as a believer. The second view
is that he is killed because he has come to believe in the falsity of
the deen in which he used to be and has changed to a deen which
he used to think false before that, and that is untrue so he is not
left alone, indeed if he does not accept Islam he is killed,1 and the
1 In the Muwatta of Imam Malik ibn Anas, may Allah show him mercy,
on this issue there is: “Yahya narrated to us from Malik from Zayd ibn Aslam
that the Messenger of Allah @ said, ‘Whoever chanes his deen, then strike his
neck’.”
This is a mursal hadith since Zayd ibn Aslam was not a Companion. However,
al-Bukhari narrated the same meaning from Ayyub from ‘Ikrimah from Ibn
‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with both of them, as, “Whoever alters his deen,
then kill him.”
Malik says about it: “The meaning of the saying of the Prophet @ as we see
it and Allah knows best, ‘Whoever changes his deen, then strike his neck,’ is
that whoever goes out of Islam to something other than it such as heretics,
etc., then if those are learnt of they are killed without being sought to repent
because their repentance is not recognised, and because they used to conceal
their disbelief and make their Islam public. I don’t think that those should be
sought to repent, and their word is not accepted. As for whoever leaves Islam
for some other [religion] and makes that public, then he is asked to repent
and if he does [it is accepted], and if not he is killed. That is because if people
are on that they are invited to Islam and asked to repent [of their disbelief],
7700

--- Page 85 ---
14. The sanctity of a Muslim’s blood
killing proceeds in a form which has already been discussed.
and if they repent that is accepted from them, and if they don’t repent they are
killed. He did not mean by it, in our opinion, and Allah knows best, whoever
leaves Judaism for Christianity, nor one who leaves Christianity for Judaism,
nor anyone of any of the religions who changes his religion, except for Islam.
Whoever leaves Islam for something else and makes that public, that is the
one who is meant by it, and Allah knows best.”
7700 71

--- Page 86 ---
15: Whoever believes in Allah and the
Last Day
Abu Hurairah î narrated that the Messenger of Allah @
said, “Whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day then
let him speak well or remain silent. Whoever believes
in Allah and the Last Day then let him generously honour1 his
neighbour. Whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day then
let him generously honour his guest.” Al-Bukhari and Muslim
narrated it.
1 Note that the Arabic root signifies both nobility and generosity, so the
hadith could also be translated: “let him honour, treat nobly, or be generous
to…”.
7722

--- Page 87 ---
15: Whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day
Commentary
About his saying @ “Whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day
then let him speak well or remain silent,” ash-Shafi’i said, may
Allah show him mercy, “The meaning of the hadith is that when
one intends to speak one should reflect and if it appears that
there is no harm in talking, then one should talk. If it appears
that there is harm in it or there is doubt in it, then one should
remain silent.”
The magnificent Imam Abu Muhammad ibn Abi Zayd
[al-Qayrawani], the Imam of the Malikis in the Maghrib in
his time, said, “All the courtesies of good branch off from four
hadith: the saying of the Prophet, ‘whoever would believe in
Allah and the Last Day then let him speak well or remain silent,’
and his saying @ ‘a part of the excellence of a man’s Islam is his
abandoning that which does not concern him,’ and his saying @ to
the one who asked him to give him concise and summary advice,
‘Do not become angry!’ and his saying, ‘None of you believes
until he loves for his brother what he loves for himself’.”
It has been transmitted that Abu’l-Qasim al-Qushayri said,
may Allah show him mercy, “Silence at its time is a quality of
men, just as speaking at the right place is one of the noblest of
qualities.” He said, “I heard Abu ‘Ali ad-Daqqaq saying, ‘Whoever
withholds himself from speaking the truth is a dumb shaytan,’
and he narrated it similarly in Hilyat al-‘Ulama (The States of
the Men of Knowledge) from more than one person. In Hilyat
al-Awliya (The States of the Close Friends [of Allah]) there is
that man ought not to let any speech issue from him except
that which he needs, just as he does not spend of his earnings
except that which he needs.” He said, “If you were to purchase
paper for the recording angels you would withhold a great deal
of speech.”
It is narrated from him @ that he said, “Part of a man’s fiqh is his
speaking little about what does not concern him.” It is narrated
from him @ that he said, “Well-being has ten portions, nine of
which consist of silence except in remembrance of Allah, mighty
7722 73

--- Page 88 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
is He and majestic.”
It is said, “Whoever is silent and so is safe, is as whoever speaks
and gains.”
It was said to someone, “Why do you cling to silence?” He said,
“Because I have never ever regretted silence, but I continually
regret speech.”
One thing which is said is, “The wound [caused] by the tongue
is like the wound [caused] by the hand.”
It has been said, “The tongue is a beast of prey, if it is left alone
it savages.”
It is narrated from ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him:
“The youth dies from the slip of his tongue,
but the man does not die from the slip of his foot,
for the slip of his mouth shoots at his head
but the slip of his foot [only] slows him up.”
One thing that has been said is:
“The silent dumb person is successful,
his speech is reckoned as nourishment.
Not every speech has an answer,
an answer that the silent one will disapprove.
And how astonishing is a wrongdoing man
who is sure that he will die.”
About his saying @ “Whoever would believe in Allah and the
Last Day then let him generously honour his neighbour, and
whoever would believe in Allah and the Last Day then let him
generously honour his guest,” Qadi ‘Iyad said, “The meaning of
the hadith is that whoever adheres to the laws of Islam holds
fast to honouring guests and neighbours generously.” He said
@ “Jibril continued advising me about the neighbour so much
that I thought he would make him inherit.”2 He said @ “Whoever
harms his neighbour then Allah will give him possession of
his house.” [There is also] His saying, exalted is He, “…and to
neighbours who are related to you and neighbours who are not related
to you.”3
2 Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated it.
3 Surat an-Nisa’: 36. “wa’l-jari dhi’l-qurba wa’l-jari’l-junubi…” “Ibn ‘Abbas
7744

--- Page 89 ---
15: Whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day
The term ‘neighbour’ pertains to four: [first] those who inhabit
your house with you. The poet said:
“O our neighbour in the house,
You are divorced.”
It also refers to whoever adjoins your house, it refers to forty
houses on every side, and it refers to whoever resides with you in
the same land. Allah, exalted is He, says, “Then they will only be
your neighbours there a very short time.”4 An immediate Muslim
neighbour who is a relative has three rights5, an unrelated Muslim
neighbour has two rights6, and an unrelated non-Muslim has
one right.7
Hospitality is a part of the courtesy of Islam, one of the
characteristics of the prophets and people of right action.
Al-Layth considered [extending hospitality for] one night an
obligation. However, they disagree as to whether hospitality is an
obligation on [both] a city dweller and on a country person or
whether it is especially an obligation on a country dweller. Malik
and Sahnun held that it is an obligation on country dwellers
because travellers can find hotels and places to stay in the city, and
they can buy what they need in the markets. It has been narrated
in the hadith literature, “Hospitality is [an obligation] on the
people of deserts [tent dwellers] and it is not [an obligation] on
city dwellers,” however this is a fabricated hadith.
said, ‘wa’l-jari dhi’l-qurba is the near relative and al-jari’l-junubi is the non-
relative’. It has also been said that dhi’l-qurba is the one who lives near to you
and al-junubi is the one who lives far away from you. According to some of
them the limit at which a neighbourhood ends is forty cubits on every side.”
Ibn Juzayy from the tafsir of the above ayah in Kitab at-tashil li ‘ulum at-tanzil.
4 Surat al-Ahzab: 65.
5 Because of his Islam, his kinship and his being a neighbour.
6 Because of his Islam and his being a neighbour.
7 Because of his being a neighbour.
7744 75

--- Page 90 ---
16: Do not become angry
Abu Hurairah î narrated that, “A man said to the
Prophet @ ‘Advise me.’ He said, ‘Do not become angry,’
and repeated it several times, saying, ‘Do not become
angry’.” Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated it.
Commentary
The meaning of his saying, “Do not become angry,” is do not
carry out or execute your anger, and the prohibition does not
refer to anger itself, because it is a part of human nature which
man is not able to repel.
He said @ “Beware of anger because it is a burning coal kindled
in the heart of the son of Adam. Do you not see how when one of
you becomes angry, his eyes become red and his external jugular
veins become swollen. When any of you senses something of that
7766

--- Page 91 ---
16: Do not become angry
then let him lie down on his bed or on the ground.”1
A man came to the Prophet @ and said, “Messenger of Allah
teach me something which will draw me near to the Garden and
keep me far from the Fire.” He said, “Do not become angry and
the Garden is yours.”2
He said @ “Anger is from shaytan and shaytan is created from
fire; the only thing which puts out fire is water so when any of
you becomes angry let him perform wudu’.”3
Abu Dharr al-Ghifari said, “The Messenger of Allah @ said to
us, ‘When any of you becomes angry while he is standing let him
sit down. Then if the anger leaves him [well and good], and if
not let him lie down’.”4
‘Isa, upon him blessings and peace, said to Yahya ibn Zakariyya,
upon him blessings and peace, “I will teach you some useful
knowledge: do not become angry.” He said, “How can I not
become angry?” He said, “If someone mentions to you something
[a defect or wrong] that is within you then say, ‘A wrong which
you have mentioned and for which I seek forgiveness of Allah’. If
someone mentions to you something [a defect or wrong] which
is not in you, then praise Allah since He did not put that with
which you are reproached in you, and it is a good deed which is
meant for you.”
‘Amr ibn al-‘As î said, “I asked the Messenger of Allah @ about
that which would keep me far from the anger of Allah, exalted is
He, and he said, ‘Do not become angry’.”
Luqman said to his son, “If you want to take someone as a
brother, then make him angry, and if he is fair to you while he
is angry [then take him as a brother] and if not then beware of
him.”
1 At-Tirmidhi narrated it.
2 At-Tabarani narrated it with two isnads one of which is sahih.
3 Abu Dawud narrated it.
4 Abu Dawud narrated it.
7766 77

--- Page 92 ---
17. Allah has decreed excellence for
everything
Abu Ya’la Shaddad ibn Aws1 î narrated that the Messenger
of Allah @ said, “Allah has decreed excellence (ihsan2)
for everything, so when you kill, do the killing excellently
1 He used to unite wisdom and knowledge. When he went to bed he would
toss and turn, and sleep would not come to him, so he would say, “O Allah,
the Fire has made me sleepless and has driven sleep far away from me.” Then
he would stand and pray until morning. Shaddad resided at al-Bayt al-Maqdis;
he was born there and died there in 58 AH at 75 years of age. Fifty hadith are
narrated from him.
2 We have already seen ihsan in hadith No. 2 on Islam, iman and ihsan. Ihsan
is from the same root as ‘hasan’ which means both ‘good’ and ‘beautiful’, and
ihsan has the sense of making an act good and beautiful. It is a degree which
7788

--- Page 93 ---
17. Allah has decreed excellence for everything
well, and when you slaughter [an animal], perform the slaughter
excellently well, and let any of you sharpen his knife and let
him put the animal at ease.” Muslim narrated it.
Commentary
His saying, “Allah has decreed excellence for everything.” A
part of the whole quality of ihsan (excellence) in the killing of
a Muslim in retaliation [for murder] is that one should acquaint
oneself with the instrument of retaliation and not kill with a
worn-out old instrument. Similarly, one should sharpen the
knife at the time of slaughtering [an animal] and give the beast
some ease. Nor should one cut anything from it until it is dead,
nor sharpen the knife in front of it, and one should offer it water
before slaughter. One should not slaughter a milking animal nor
one which has a young one until it has no need of the milk.
One should not be rough while milking and one should trim
one’s nails at milking. They say, “One [animal] should not be
slaughtered in front of the other.”3
is superior to right action because it is not only right but beautiful.
3 It is important to note here that the modern industrial process, driven
by the insane greed and anxiety which motivates usury, does not honour any
of the above courtesies of slaughter even when it is so-called ‘halal’ meat.
7788 79

--- Page 94 ---
18. Have taqwa of Allah wherever you
are
Abu Dharr Jundub ibn Junadah1 and Abu ‘Abd ar-Rahman
Mu’adh ibn Jabal, may Allah be pleased with both of
them, narrated that the Messenger of Allah @ said, “Have
taqwa of Allah wherever you are and follow up a wrong action
1 He was from the tribe of Ghifar who lived in the desert and he came
to Makkah because he had heard a rumour of the sending of the Prophet
@. When he met him, he was one of the very first to accept Islam. Then he
returned to his tribe and stayed with them until the Hijrah, and his brother
Anees and a half of the tribe accepted Islam from him. When the Prophet @
came to Madinah the other half of the tribe accepted Islam. He was one of the
most abstinent of men with a great capacity for knowledge. The Chosen One
@ bore witness that he was one of the most truthful men. He lived at the end
of his life in ar-Rabdhah some distance from Madinah towards Iraq where he
died in 31 AH. 281 hadith are narrated from him.
8800

--- Page 95 ---
18. Have taqwa of Allah wherever you are
with a good action which will efface it, and treat people good
naturedly.” At-Tirmidhi narrated it, and said, “A good hadith,”
and in some copies, “Good, sahih.”
Commentary
His saying @ “Have taqwa of Allah wherever you are,” i.e. have
taqwa of Him in solitude as you have taqwa of Him in the presence
of people, and have taqwa of Him in all other places and at all
other times. Something that is an aid to taqwa is to become
conscious that Allah, exalted is He, is watchful over the slave in
all of his states. Allah, exalted is He, says, “Three men cannot confer
together secretly without Him being the fourth of them.”2
Taqwa is a comprehensive word comprising the performance of
the obligations and the giving up of what is forbidden.3
His saying @ “and follow up a wrong action with a good which
will efface it,” i.e. when you have done a wrong action seek
forgiveness of Allah for it and after it do a good action to efface
it.
Know that the apparent meaning of this hadith seems to
indicate that a good action only effaces one wrong action even
though each good action is worth ten, but that multiples [of
rewards for a good action] do not efface a wrong action, but this
is not the apparent meaning. Rather one good action effaces
ten wrong actions, and in the hadith literature there is evidence
of that, which is his saying @ “Declare Allah to be greater [with
Allahu akbar] after each prayer ten times, and praise [Him with
al-hamdulillah] ten times and glorify [Him with subhana’llah]
ten times. That is one hundred and fifty4 on the tongue, and one
thousand five hundred in the scales.” Then he said @ “Which of
you can do one thousand five hundred bad deeds in one day?”5
2 Surat al-Mujadalah: 7.
3 Taqwa does contain an element of fear of Allah.
4 With five prayers a day.
5 Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi narrated it and at-Tirmidhi said, “Good,
8800 81

--- Page 96 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
indicating that multiple [rewards for a single right action] do
efface wrong actions.
The apparent meaning of the hadith is that a good action effaces
wrong actions unqualifiedly, however it has to be interpreted as
wrong actions connected to a right due to Allah, exalted is He.
As for wrong actions connected to rights due to slaves [of Allah]
such as anger, backbiting and telling tales, nothing effaces them
except the slave [whom one has wronged] considering it undone
(i.e. they must forgive it), and one must specify to him the nature
of the wrongdoing, saying, “I said such and such against you.”
In the hadith there is an indication that taking oneself to
account is an obligation. He said @ “Take yourselves to account
before you are taken to account.” Allah, exalted is He, says, “You
who have iman! have taqwa of Allah and let each self look to what it has
sent forward for Tomorrow.”6
His saying @ “and treat people good naturedly.” Know that good
nature (al-khuluq al-hasan) is a comprehensive phrase for showing
excellent behaviour to people and withholding harm from them.
He said @ “You cannot encompass people with your property, so
encompass them with an open face and good nature.”7 From him
@ there is, “The best of you is the best of you in character.”8 From
him @ there is that a man came to him and said, “Messenger of
Allah what is the best action?” He said, “Good nature,”9 and it is
based on what we had previously of, “Do not become angry.”
It is said that a prophet complained to his Lord about his wife’s
bad nature and Allah, exalted is He, revealed to him, “I have
made that your portion of harm.” From Abu Hurairah î that
he said, “The Messenger of Allah @ said, ‘The most perfect of
believers in belief is the best of them in character, and the best of
them are those who are best towards their women’.”10 From him
sahih.”
6 Surat al-Hashr: 18.
7 Abu Ya’la and al-Bazzar related it.
8 Ibn Hibban narrated it.
9 ‘Abd ar-Razzaq narrated it in his book.
10 Al-Bayhaqi narrated it.
8822

--- Page 97 ---
18. Have taqwa of Allah wherever you are
@ there is that he said, “Allah has chosen Islam for you as a deen,
so honour it with good nature and liberal generosity, because
it is incomplete without them.”11 Jibril ï said to the Prophet @
when “Make allowances (al-‘afw) for people”12 was revealed, he said
in explanation of it, “That you pardon whoever wrongs you, and
keep up relations with someone who severs relations with you,
and give to someone who withholds from you.” Allah, exalted is
He, says, “Repel the bad with something better…”13
It was said in explanation of the ayah, “Indeed you are truly vast in
character,”14 he said, “His nature was the Qur’an, he was bound by
its command, checked by its reproval, contented with that with
which it was contented and displeased with that with which it was
displeased @.”
11 At-Tabarani narrated it in al-Awsat.
12 Surat al-A’raf: 199. ‘Afw is literally ‘pardoning’ which is to forget even
that the wrong was done one.
13 Surah Fussilat: 34. “Repel the bad with something better and, if there is enmity
between you and someone else, he will be like a bosom friend.”
14 Surat al-Qalam: 4.
8822 83

--- Page 98 ---
8844

--- Page 99 ---
19. Be mindful of Allah, and He will be mindful of you
19. Be mindful of Allah, and He will be
mindful of you
Abu’l-‘Abbas ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas1, may Allah be pleased
with both of them, said, “I was behind the Prophet @ [on
a camel] one day, and he said to me, ‘Boy, I will teach
you some words: Be mindful of Allah and He will be mindful of
you. Be mindful of Allah and you will find Him in front of you.
When you ask then ask Allah. When you seek help then seek
help from Allah. Know that if the Ummah gathered together to
benefit you with something, they would not benefit you except
with something that Allah had already written for you. If they
gathered together to harm you with something, they would not
harm you except with something that Allah had already written
against you. The pens have been lifted and the pages are dry.”
At-Tirmidhi related it and said, “A good sahih hadith.”
In a narration apart from that of at-Tirmidhi there is, “Be
mindful of Allah and you will find Him in front of you. Make
yourself known to Allah in ample circumstances, He will
acknowledge you [when you are] in severe difficulty. Know that
1 He was born three years before the Hijrah. He was named “Tarjuman
al-Qur’an – The Translator of the Qur’an”, and was known as “The Ocean”
because of the vastness of his knowledge. In a hadith with an authentic isnad,
the Prophet @ supplicated for him saying, “O Allah give him discernment in
the deen and teach him the inner meaning.” 1,660 hadith are narrated from
him. He died in Ta’if in 68 AH when he was 71 years old. Muhammad ibn
al-Hanafiyyah, a son of ‘Ali through a later wife al-Hanafiyyah, led the funeral
prayer for him, and he said, “There has died, by Allah, this day the best of this
ummah.”
8844 85

--- Page 100 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
help is with patience, deliverance is with distress, and that with
difficulty there is ease.”
Commentary
His saying @ “Be mindful of Allah and He will be mindful of
you,” i.e. be mindful of His commands and follow them, and
keep within His prohibitions, He will be mindful of you in your
ups and downs, in your world and in your next life. Allah, exalted
is He, says, “Anyone who acts rightly, male or female, being a mu’min,
We will give them a good life.”2 Whatever trials and afflictions come
to a slave are because of his neglect of the commands of Allah.
Allah, exalted is He, says, “Any disaster that strikes you is through
what your own hands have earned.”3
His saying @ “You will find Him in front of you”. He said @
“Make yourself known to Allah in ample circumstances, He will
acknowledge you [when you are] in severe difficulty.” Allah,
exalted is He, clearly states in His book that right action benefits
one in difficult circumstances and rescues one who does it, and
that wrong action leads to severe difficulty. Allah, exalted is He,
says in telling the story of Yunus, upon him blessings and peace,
“Had it not been that he was a man who glorified Allah, he would have
remained inside its belly until the Day they are raised again.”4 When
Fir’awn said, “I believe that there is no god but Him in whom the tribe
of Israel believe,” then the angel said to him, “What, now! When
previously you rebelled and were one of the corrupters?”5
His saying @ “When you ask, then ask Allah,” indicates that a
slave ought not to connect his secret to other than Allah, rather he
should trust in Him in all of his affairs. Moreover, if the need for
which he is asking is one of those which is not customarily found
in the hands of people such as seeking guidance, knowledge,
2 Surat an-Nahl: 97
3 Surat ash-Shura: 30.
4 Surat as-Saffat: 143.
5 Surah Yunus: 91.
8866

--- Page 101 ---
19. Be mindful of Allah, and He will be mindful of you
understanding of the Qur’an and Sunnah, the healing of sickness,
and attainment of safety from the trials of the world and from
the torment of the next life, then he must ask his Lord for that. If
the necessity for which he is asking is one which customarily Allah,
glorious is He and exalted, places in the hands of His creation,
such as necessities connected to craftsmen, manufacturers and
people in governance, then he should ask Allah, exalted is He,
to make their hearts kind towards him, saying, “O Allah make
the hearts of Your male and female slaves kind towards me,” etc.
He must not ask Allah to grant him independence from people,
because he @ heard ‘Ali saying, “O Allah give us independence
from Your creation,” and he said to him, “Do not say this, for
some of the creation need others6, but rather say, ‘O Allah give
us independence from the corrupt ones of Your creation’.” As for
asking people and depending on them, that is blameworthy. It is
related from Allah, exalted is He, in the revealed books, “Does
he knock with [his] thoughts on the door of someone other than
Me while My door is open? He wishes, and is anyone wished for in
distressing circumstances other than Me, and I am the Powerful
King? I will dress whoever wishes for other than Me in a robe of
humiliation among people…”
His saying, “And know that if the ummah…”. Since man
hopes for good treatment from whomever he loves, and fears
bad treatment from whomever he is wary of, Allah asserts the
hopelessness of [expecting] any benefit from people by His
saying, “If Allah afflicts you with harm, no one can remove it except Him.
If He desires good for you, no one can avert His favour.”7 Nor does any
of this negate His saying, exalted is He, when He relates the story
of Musa, upon him blessings and peace, “and I am afraid they will
kill me,”8 and His saying, exalted is He, “we are afraid that he might
persecute us or overstep the bounds”,9 and similarly His saying, “take
6 i.e. the creation is interdependent.
7 Surah Yunus: 107.
8 Surat al-Qasas: 33.
9 Surah Ta Ha: 44.
8866 87

--- Page 102 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
all necessary precautions”10, etc. Indeed safety is by the decree of
Allah and destruction is by the decree of Allah, and man flees
from the causes of destruction to the causes of safety. Allah,
exalted is He, says, “Do not cast yourselves into destruction.”11 There
is his saying @ “Know that help is with patience,” and he said @
“Do not wish to meet the enemy, and ask Allah for safety. If you
meet them be patient and do not run away, for truly Allah is with
those who are patient.” Similarly, patience in affliction in a place
is followed by help, for there is his saying @ “Truly deliverance is
with distress (al-karb)” and distress is ‘a severe trial’, so when the
trial is severe, Allah, exalted is He, follows it with deliverance, as
it is said, “Crisis, be severe! You will pass.”
His saying, “Truly with difficulty there is ease,”12 and it has been
narrated in another hadith that he said, “A difficulty will never
overcome two eases,” and that is that Allah mentioned difficulty
twice and He mentioned ease twice, however according to the
Arabs whenever a definite noun is repeated it is singular since
the second definite article is for distinguishing a noun as one
already known to the reader and hearer [and thus there is only
one difficulty mentioned but two eases].13
10 Surat an-Nisa’: 70.
11 Surat al-Baqarah: 194.
12 ‘Abdullah Ibrahim al-Ansari says that this is a hadith which is agreed
upon. There is also the word of Allah, exalted is He, “For truly with hardship
comes ease; truly with hardship comes ease.” Surat al-Inshirah, ayat 5-6.
13 Some of the people of knowledge have pointed out that Allah, exalted is
He, says, “Allah will appoint after difficulty, ease,” Surat at-Talaq: 7, and that this
is the second ease mentioned in the Qur’an which comes after the difficulty,
as well as the ease which is with the difficulty, and Allah knows best.
8888

--- Page 103 ---
20. Shame and Modesty
Abu Mas’ud ‘Uqbah ibn ‘Amr al-Ansari al-Badri1 î
said, “The Messenger of Allah @ said, ‘A part of that
which people understood from the speech of the first
prophethood is: If you have no shame, do what you want’.”
Al-Bukhari narrated it.
Commentary
His saying @ “If you have no shame, do what you want,” means
that when you want to do something, if it is something of which
1 He was not present at Badr, but he was called Badri because he resided
there. He later lived in Kufa and built a home there. He died in Madinah in
41 AH. 102 hadith are narrated from him.
8888 89

--- Page 104 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
you are not ashamed before Allah – not before people – of doing,
then do it, and if not then do not do it. All of Islam pivots around
this hadith, and based on this [understanding] is his saying @
“Do what you want”. There are those who interpret the hadith
in the sense that if you are not ashamed before Allah, exalted is
He, and are not fearfully watchful of Allah then give your self its
desire and do what it wants; so that then the command in it is for
the purpose of threatening in order to frighten, not in the sense
of declaring it permissible, and it would be as His saying, exalted
is He, “Do what you like…”2 and like His saying, exalted is He, “Stir
up any of them you can with your voice.”3
2 “Do what you like. He sees whatever you do.” Surah Fussilat: 40. The command
to do whatever one wants is coupled with the reminder of Allah’s seeing one’s
actions.
3 Surat al-Isra’: 64. The ayah is addressed to Iblis.
9900

--- Page 105 ---
21. Istiqamah –Going Straight
Abu ‘Amr, and it is said Abu ‘Amrah, Sufyan ibn ‘Abdullah1
î said, “I said, ‘Messenger of Allah, say to me something
on Islam about which I will not ask anyone other than
you’. He said, ‘Say, “I believe in Allah” then go straight’.” Muslim
narrated it.
Commentary
His saying @ “Say, ‘I believe in Allah’ then go straight” as you
have been commanded and forbidden. Istiqamah2 (to go straight)
1 Abu ‘Amr was called ath-Thaqafi because of his relationship to Thaqeef.
He has also been called at-Ta’ifi because he is numbered among the people of
at-Ta’if. ‘Umar î appointed him to collect the zakah of at-Ta’if. He narrated
five hadith.
2 Istiqamah derives from qama – ‘he stood’ and thus can possibly be
9900 91

--- Page 106 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
is persevering in the path by doing what is obligatory and leaving
what is forbidden. Allah, exalted is He, says, “Go straight as you have
been commanded, and also those who turn3 with you [to Allah].”4 He
said, exalted is He, “The angels descend on those who say, ‘Our Lord
is Allah,’ and then go straight”5 i.e. at death, giving them good news
in His words, exalted is He, “Do not fear and do not grieve, and rejoice
in the Garden which you have been promised.”6 In the commentary it is
said that when they are given good news of the Garden they say,
“And our children, what will they eat and what will their state be
after us?” It will be said to them, “We are your protectors in the life
of the dunya7 and the akhirah,”8 i.e. “we (the angels) will look after
their affairs after you, so let your eyes be at rest about that”.
understood as ‘upstanding’ or ‘upright’, but in the form mustaqeem is most
often explained as that path ‘which has no crookedness in it’, i.e. ‘straight’.
3 Tawbah – ‘turning’ has degrees the first of which is to turn from kufr and
shirk to iman, the second of which is to turn from acts of disobedience to acts
of obedience, and the highest of which is to turn from other than Allah to
Allah alone.
4 Surah Hud: 112.
5 Surah Fussilat: 31.
6 Ibid.
7 Dunya, which is often translated as ‘the world’, is a feminine adjective
meaning ‘lower’ or ‘nearer’, it qualifies the noun ‘life’ as in this ayah, ‘the
lower life’ and is opposed to akhirah the ‘later’ [life]. It is often used as if it
were a substantive.
8 Ibid.
9922

--- Page 107 ---
22. The Obligations
Abu ‘Abdullah Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah al-Ansari1 î said, “A man
asked the Messenger of Allah @ saying, ‘What do you
think, if I pray the obligatory prayers, fast Ramadan,
1 Jabir was one of the great companions, and his father ‘Abdullah died as
a shaheed at the battle of Uhud. The Prophet @ said to Jabir, “My son, shall I
not give you the good news that Allah, mighty is He and majestic, has brought
your father to life and said, ‘What do you wish?’ He said, ‘O my Lord, that you
should return my spirit and send me back to the world so that I can be killed
again.’ He said, ‘I have decreed that they (the dead) do not return to it (the
world)’.” His father died leaving a debt, so the Prophet @ sought forgiveness of
Allah on Jabir’s behalf î twenty-seven times in one night for Him to discharge
the debt of his father. Jabir died in Madinah in 73 AH when he was 94 years
old. 1,540 hadith are narrated from him.
9922 93

--- Page 108 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
and consider halal that which is halal and consider haram that
which is haram, and I do not add anything to that, shall I enter
the Garden?’ He said, ‘Yes’.” Muslim narrated it. The meaning
of “I consider haram that which is haram” is “I avoid it”, and
the meaning of “I consider halal that which is halal” is “I do it
believing that it is halal.”
Commentary
His saying, “What do you think?…” means “tell me about…”.
His saying, “and I consider halal that which is halal” means “I
believe that it is halal and of it I do that which is obligatory”. “And
I consider haram that which is haram” means “I believe that it is
haram and I don’t do it.” His saying @ “Yes,” means “You will enter
the Garden.”2
2 If a Muslim man or woman fulfils their obligatory duties of praying the
five prayers, paying the zakah, fasting Ramadan and performing the Hajj if they
are able, then they are living a life of worship and service to Allah that no-one
else in our age equals. As we have shown this requires of us to restore the
pillar of zakah and the whole pattern of Islamic non-statist governance.
9944

--- Page 109 ---
23. Purity is Half of Iman
Abu Malik al-Harith ibn ‘Asim al-Ash’ari1 î said, “The
Messenger of Allah @ said, ‘Purity is half of iman;
al-hamdulillah fills the scales; subhana’llah wa’l-hamdulillah
both fill – or fills – whatever is between heaven and earth;
1 Al-Ash’ari denotes a relationship to a tribe in the Yemen who are known
as al-Ash’ariyyun. Abu Malik is not the same person as the famous Abu Musa
al-Ash’ari. Abu Malik later lived in Egypt, and he died in the plague during
the khilafah of ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab in 18 AH.
9944 95

--- Page 110 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
prayer is light; sadaqah2 is proof; patience is radiant light; and
the Qur’an is an argument for or against you. Everybody goes
out in the morning and sells his self, then he either frees it from
slavery or destroys it.” Muslim narrated it.
Commentary
In his saying @ “Purity is half of iman”, purity is explained by
al-Ghazali as purity of the heart from malice, envy, spite, and all
other sicknesses of the heart. That is because perfect iman is only
completed by that. Whoever has the two shahadahs has obtained
half [of iman]. Whoever purifies his heart from the remaining
sicknesses has perfected his iman. Whoever does not purify his
heart then his iman is defective. One of them said, “Whoever
purifies his heart, does wudu and ghusl and prays, enters the
prayer with both purifications together. Whoever enters the
prayer with purity of the limbs particularly, has entered with one
of the two purifications, and Allah glorious and exalted is He,
only looks at purity of heart, because of his saying @ ‘Truly Allah
does not look at your bodies nor at your outward forms but He
looks at your hearts’3.”
His saying @ “Al-hamdulillah fills the scales; subhana’llah wa’l-
hamdulillah both fill – or fills – whatever is between heaven and
earth.” This fills in the detail in another hadith, which is that
Musa, upon him blessings and peace, said to Allah, “My Lord,
show me an action which will enter me into the Garden.” He
said, “Musa, say, ‘There is no god but Allah’, for if the seven
heavens and seven earths were put in one pan of a scale and
‘there is no god but Allah’ in the other pan, ‘there is no god but
Allah’ would be heavier.” It is well known that the seven heavens
and earths are the vastest things between heaven and earth.
Since al-hamdulillah fills the scale and more, al-hamdulillah must
fill what is between heaven and earth, since the scale is vaster
2 i.e. zakah and then optional acts of sadaqah.
3 Muslim narrated it.
9966

--- Page 111 ---
23. Purity is Half of Iman
than that which is between heaven and earth and al-hamdulillah
fills it. What is meant is that if it were a physical body it would fill
it, or that the reward of al-hamdulillah would fill it.
His saying @ “Prayer is light,” i.e. its reward is light. In another
hadith there is, “And give good news of complete light on the
day of Resurrection, to those who walk in darkness to the
mosques.”4
His saying @ “Sadaqah is proof” i.e. proof of the soundness of
iman of one who gives it, and it is named sadaqah because it is a
proof of the truthfulness (sidq) of his iman. That is because the
hypocrite may pray but usually sadaqah is not easy for him5.
His saying, “Patience is radiant light,” i.e. the beloved patience
which is patience in obedience to Allah, and in the trials and
abhorrent things of worldly life. Its meaning is that its (patience’s)
possessor will continue to be in the right [way].
The meaning of his saying, “Everybody goes out in the
morning and sells his self” is that every human strives for his
self, and some of them sell it to Allah through obedience to Him
and so free it from torment, and some of them sell it to shaytan
and to whims by following the two of them “and so destroys it”,
i.e. makes it perish. He said, upon him blessings and peace,
“Whoever says when he enters morning or evening, ‘O Allah, I
have entered upon the morning calling on You to witness and
calling on the bearers of Your throne to witness, and Your angels
and Your prophets and all of Your creation, that truly You, You
are Allah, there is no god but You alone, no partner to You, and
that Muhammad is Your slave and Your prophet’ then Allah will
free a quarter of him from the Fire, if he says it twice Allah will
free a half of him from the Fire, if he says it three times Allah
4 Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi transmitted it.
5 The historically important instance of this was the refusal of the Arabs
to pay the zakah to the khalifah Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him. Even
though they continued to affirm that they were Muslims and that they would
perform the prayers, Abu Bakr î insisted on fighting them and that is the
ruling up to this day, that war is waged on those who refuse to pay the zakah.
See in hadith no. 14 Imam an-Nawawi’s commentary on the reasons for which
a Muslim may be killed.
9966 97

--- Page 112 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
will free three quarters of him from the Fire, and if he says it
four times Allah will free all of him from the Fire.”
If it is said, “If the owner frees part of his slave the freeing
passes to the rest of him, and Allah, exalted is He, has freed the
first quarter but then it did not extend over him and similarly
the rest,” then the answer is that the extension is compulsory and
compulsory things do not affect Allah, exalted is He, as opposed
to others, and that which He does not will, does not happen in
His judgement.
Allah, exalted is He, says, “Allah has bought from the mu’minun
their selves and their wealth…”6 One of the people of knowledge
said, “No nobler sale than this has ever occurred. That is because
the buyer is Allah and the sellers are the believers, the sale is
their selves and the price is the Garden.” In the ayah there is
an indication that a seller is first of all compelled to surrender
the goods before he receives the price, and that a buyer is not
compelled first of all to surrender the price. That is because
Allah, exalted is He, made jihad a duty on believers even to the
extent that they are killed in the way of Allah and so He made
it obligatory on them that they surrender the selves which have
been sold, and [then] take the Garden.
If it is said, “How can the Master buy from His slaves their
selves, and their selves are His property?” It is said, “He wrote
them a contract for them to purchase their freedom and then He
bought from them. Allah, exalted is He, made five prayers and
fasting, etc., obligatory on them, and when they do that they are
free [and so then they can sell their selves for the Garden], and
Allah, exalted is He, knows best.”
6 Surat at-Tawbah: 111. “Allah has bought from the mu’minun their selves and
their wealth in return for the Garden. They fight in the Way of Allah and they kill and
are killed. It is a promise binding on Him in the Torah, the Injil and the Qur’an and
who is truer to his contract than Allah? Rejoice then in the bargain you have made.
That is the great victory.”
9988

--- Page 113 ---
9988 99

--- Page 114 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
24. Injustice
Abu Dharr al-Ghifari î narrated from the Prophet @
in that which he narrated from his Lord, mighty is He
and majestic, that He said, “My slaves, I have forbidden
injustice to Myself and have forbidden it between you, so do
not wrong each other. My slaves, all of you are astray except
for whomever I guide, so seek guidance from Me, I will guide
you. My slaves, all of you are hungry except for whomever I
feed, so ask Me to feed you, I will feed you. My slaves, all of
110000

--- Page 115 ---
24. Injustice
you are naked except for whomever I clothe, so seek clothing
from Me, I will clothe you. My slaves, truly you miss the way by
night and day and I forgive1 wrong actions altogether, so ask
for My forgiveness; I will forgive you. My slaves, you can not
reach My harm so that you could harm Me, and you can never
attain My benefit so that you could benefit Me. My slaves, even
if the first and last of you, your human beings and your Jinn
were according to the most God-fearing heart of any one man
among you, that would not increase anything in My kingdom.
My slaves, even if the first and last of you, your human beings
and your Jinn were according to the most wicked heart of any
one man among you, that would not decrease anything in
My kingdom. My slaves, even if the first and last of you, your
human beings and your Jinn were to stand on one flat piece
of land and they were to ask Me and I gave each one of them
what he asked for, that would not decrease what I have except
as the needle does when it is entered into the sea. My slaves,
they are only your actions which I enumerate for you, then later
I will repay you for them. So whoever finds good then let him
praise Allah, and whoever finds other than that then let him
not blame anyone but himself.” Muslim narrated it.
Commentary
His saying, mighty is He and majestic, “Truly I have forbidden
Myself injustice,” i.e. “I am too far removed from it [as an
impurity]”, and injustice is inconceivable with respect to Allah,
exalted is He, for injustice is going past the limit2 and becoming
occupied in the property of another3 which are both impossible
1 “ Ghafara” – literally “he covered” here translated as “He forgave” means
really that “He covered over [the wrong action for the slave”, so that he does
not see it in his reckoning.
2 Allah is exalted beyond limits.
3 Other than Allah owns nothing, and man is properly a khalifah who stands
in on behalf of the King in His kingdom, but he is not an owner of anything at
110000 101

--- Page 116 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
with respect to Allah, exalted is He.
His saying, exalted is He, “Do not wrong each other,” i.e. do not let
any of you do injustice to others.
In His saying, exalted is He, “My slaves, you miss the way by night
and day,” takhta’üna with a fathah (a) on the ta and on the ta is on
the basis that it derives from khati’a “he did wrong or committed a
mistake”, which has a fathah on the kha and a kasrah on the ta and
which in the imperfect tense is yakhta’u. It is permitted to have a
dammah (u) on the ta [of tukhti’üna] on the basis that it is from [the
fourth form of the verb which is] akhta’a “he missed or failed to hit
it (for example, the archer failed to hit the target)”. [The word]
al-khata’u “a wrong action, mistake or error,” is used for [an act
done] intentionally or through forgetfulness, and it is not sound to
deny this linguistic understanding, and His words, exalted is He,
refute it: “Killing them is a terrible mistake (khata’an)”4, and it has also
been recited as khit’an.
His saying, exalted is He, “My slaves, even if the first and last
of you, your human beings and your Jinn…”. Traditional and
intellectual proofs show that Allah is independent in His essence
of everything, and that He, exalted is He, does not increase in
abundance because of anything of His creations. Allah, exalted
is He, has made clear that He has the kingdom of the heavens
and earth and what is in between them, then He has made clear
that He is in no need of that. Allah, exalted is He, says, “He creates
whatever He wills”5 and He is able to do away with this existence
and to create other than it. Whoever is able to create every thing
is in no need of any existent. Moreover, He glorious and exalted
is He, made clear that He is in no need of a partner, so He said,
exalted is He, “He has no partner in the Kingdom”6. Moreover, He
all, his own life and body being gifts to him which he looks after as a steward
on behalf of the King until the King requires them to be returned to Him. It
is said that when Muslims are khalifahs in this sense, they will understand the
reality of khilafah in the sense of governance.
4 Surat al-Isra: 31.
5 Surat al-Ma’idah: 19.
6 Surat al-Furqan: 2.
110022

--- Page 117 ---
24. Injustice
i has made clear that He is independent and has no need of a
helper or assistant, so He, exalted is He, says, “Who needs no one
to protect Him from abasement,”7 so the attribute of might is firmly
established and endless for Him, and the attribute of abasement
is prohibited for Him, exalted is He. Whoever is like that is in
no need of the obedience of the obedient. Even if all people
obeyed with the obedience of the most god-fearing man among
them and hastened to obey His commands and prohibitions
and did not oppose Him, He, glorious is He and exalted, would
not boast of that abundance and that would not be an increase
in His kingdom. Indeed their obedience is only attained by His
grace and help, and their obedience is His blessing upon them.
Even if all of them were to disobey Him with the disobedience
of the most wicked of men, Iblis, and if they were to oppose His
commands and prohibitions, that would not harm Him and it
would not decrease anything of the perfection of His kingdom.
For if He wished He would destroy them and create others. Glory
be to the One who is not benefitted by obedience nor harmed
by disobedience.
His saying, exalted is He, “and I were to give each one of them
what he asked for, that would not decrease what I have, except
as a needle does when it is entered into the sea,” and it is well
known that a needle does not visibly decrease the ocean at all,
and that which is attached to a needle does not appear to have
any visible trace, nor [any trace] in the scales.
His saying, exalted is He, “Whoever finds good, then let him
praise Allah,” i.e. for his good grace in being guided to His
obedience.
His saying, exalted is He, “Whoever finds other than that, then
let him blame no one but his self”, since he gave it its desire and
followed its whims.
7 Surat al-Isra: 111.
110022 103

--- Page 118 ---
110044

--- Page 119 ---
25. The Wealthy and the Poor
25. The Wealthy and the Poor
Abu Dharr î also narrated that, “Some people from the
Companions of the Messenger of Allah said to the Prophet
@ ‘Messenger of Allah, the people of great wealth have
gone off with the rewards. They pray as we pray, fast as we fast, and
pay the zakah1 with the excess of their properties’. He said, ‘Has
Allah not given you that with which you can give sadaqah? Truly,
in every glorification there is sadaqah, in every magnification
(takbir) there is sadaqah, every praise is sadaqah, in every “There
is no god but Allah” there is sadaqah, in every command to the
good there is sadaqah, in every forbidding of the wrong there
is sadaqah and in every act of sexual intercourse by any of you
there is sadaqah’. They said, ‘Messenger of Allah, can one of us
approach his appetite and have a reward for it?’ He said, ‘What
do you think, if he had put it into something haram would there
not have been a wrong [written] against him? Similarly if he puts
it in the halal there is a reward for him’.” Muslim narrated it.
1 Yatasaddaqun, from sadaqa: it is clear that the sadaqah referred to here
refers first to the obligatory zakah, because the wealthy are enabled to pay
zakah and more, and second to optional acts of generosity, since the poor have
the option of extra voluntary acts, but do not attain the level of having to pay
zakah, and Allah knows best.
110044 105

--- Page 120 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
Commentary
His saying, “They said, ‘Messenger of Allah, can one of us
approach his appetite and have a reward for it?’ He said, ‘What
do you think, if he had put it into something haram would there
not have been a wrong [written] against him?’” Know that the
appetite for sexual intercourse is one which the prophets and
people of right action love, they say for those benefits of the
deen and the world which are in it: lowering the eye, breaking
the appetite so that one doesn’t approach adultery, and gaining
children by whom populating the world and the increase of
the ummah until the Day of Rising are made complete2. They
say that involvement with all other appetites hardens the heart
except for this one, for it softens the heart.
2 Assumed in this understanding is that multiple-wife families are sunnah,
but that it is permissible for a man to have one wife. This is the contrary of the
modern misunderstanding that multiple-wife families are only acceptable in
extraordinary situations of jihad and the like.
110066

--- Page 121 ---
26. Sadaqah
Abu Hurairah î said, “The Messenger of Allah @ said,
‘Every member of every person owes sadaqah each day
in which the sun rises. To exercise justice between two
people is sadaqah, to help a man with his beast, to help him
to mount it, or to lift his goods up to him when he is on it is
sadaqah, a good word is sadaqah, every step with which you walk
110066 107

--- Page 122 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
to prayer [in the mosque] is sadaqah, and to remove some harm
from the road is sadaqah.” Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated it.
Commentary
His saying @ “Every member (sulama)1 of every person owes
sadaqah each day”, and the sulama here are the members of the
human body and it has been mentioned that there are three
hundred and sixty members each of which owes a sadaqah every
day. Every act of good, glorification, declaration of “There is no
god but Allah”, magnification, or every step which one takes to
prayer is sadaqah. Whoever performs two raka’at at the beginning
of his day has paid the zakah on his body and so preserves the
remainder of it. It has been narrated in the hadith literature
that, “Two raka’at of ad-Duha (the optional mid-morning prayer)
stand in place of all of that.”2 In the hadith literature there is
that “Allah, exalted is He, says, ‘Son of Adam, pray four raka’at at
the beginning of the day and I will suffice you at the beginning
of the day and I will suffice you at the end of it.”3
1 A word which encompasses organs, limbs and bones.
2 Ahmad and Abu Dawud narrated it.
3 Ahmad and Abu Ya’la narrated it.
110088

--- Page 123 ---
110088 109

--- Page 124 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
27. Birr and Ithm
An-Nawwas ibn Sam’an î narrated that the Prophet @ said,
“Birr1 is good nature, and ithm2 is that which becomes
agitated3 in your self and which you would hate for people
to discover.” Muslim narrated it.
From Wabisah ibn Ma’bad î that he said, “I came to the
Messenger of Allah @ and he said, ‘You have come to ask about
birr?’ I said, ‘Yes!’ He said, ‘Ask your heart for a judgement. Birr
is that towards which the self is tranquil and towards which the
heart is tranquil. Ithm is that which becomes agitated in the self
and it goes agitatedly to and fro in the breast even though people
repeatedly give you a judgement [as to a matter’s permissibility]’.”
A good hadith which we have narrated in the two Musnads of the
Imams Ahmad ibn Hanbal and ad-Darimi with a good isnad.
Commentary
His saying @ “Birr is good nature,” and we have spoken before on
good nature. Ibn ‘Umar said, “Birr is a simple matter: a cheerful
face and a soft tongue.” Allah, exalted is He, mentioned an ayah
which gathered together all the types of birr when He, exalted is
He, says, “Rather, those with true devoutness [birr] are those who have
iman in Allah and the Last Day…”4
1 The Arabic word is used here, because a point made clear by these two
hadith is that birr and ithm were words which caused some difficulties even to
Arabs, difficulties which they had to resolve by asking the Messenger of Allah
@ to explain them. ‘Birr’ derives from the word for ‘land’ as opposed to ‘sea’
and is said to contain the ideas of amplitude and extensiveness as well as good
treatment and solicitous concern for others. It is held to be a quality which
encompasses good behaviour towards Allah, parents and strangers.
2 Ithm could indeed be translated as ‘guilt’.
3 ‘haka’, the root of which is ‘to become woven’, the Imam later explains
to mean ‘to go agitatedly to and fro’ perhaps like the weaver passing the weft
back and forwards across the warp.
4 Surat al-Baqarah, 177.
111100

--- Page 125 ---
27. Birr and Ithm
His saying @ “Ithm is that which becomes agitated in your self”
i.e. it becomes agitated and it goes agitatedly to and fro, and the
self is not at ease about doing it. In the hadith there is a proof
that man must consult his heart when he wants to embark on an
action, so then if the self is at ease with it he must do it, and if it
is not at ease he must leave it alone. We have previously spoken
about ambivalent doubt with respect to the hadith: “The halal is
clear and the haram is clear.”
It is narrated that Adam, upon him blessings and peace, gave
his sons some parting advice, of which there is that he said, “If
you want to do something, then if your hearts are agitated, do
not do it, for when I drew near to eating from the tree my heart
was agitated at eating.” Of them there is also that he said, “If you
want to do something then look at its consequences, for if I had
looked at the consequences of eating, I would not have eaten
from the tree.” Of them there is that he said, “If you want to do
something take the advice of experienced people, for if I had
taken the advice of the angels, they would have advised me not
to eat from the tree.”
His saying @ “And which you would hate for people to discover,”
is because people blame a man for eating that about which there
is some doubt and for receiving that about which there is doubt
and for marrying a woman about whom it has been said, “She
was suckled along with him.”5 For this reason he said @ “How
[can he do that]? when it is said…” Similarly with the haram,
when a person receives it, he hates that people should discover
him. Similar to the [situation with the] haram is consuming
other people’s property, for it is permitted [to him] if he had
ascertained that [the other] was contented with that, but if he
has some doubt as to whether he is contented, then it is forbidden
to consume it. Similarly, spending something entrusted to one
without permission of its owner, because if people came to
5 Two children suckling from the same woman creates a sibling relationship
between the two which prevents their marriage and either’s marriage to any of
the other’s brothers, sisters, parents, sons, daughters, aunts and uncles, etc., as
if they were genuinely brother and sister.
111100 111

--- Page 126 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
discover it they would reject that, and one hates that people
should come to discover it because they would express their
disapproval.
His saying @ “That which becomes agitated in the self … even
though people repeatedly give you a judgement”, for example the
gift which you receive from a person the majority of whose wealth
is haram, and the self wavers agitatedly to and fro as to whether
the gift is permissible, and a mufti gives you a judgement on the
permissibility of consuming it, however the judgement does not
remove ambivalent doubt. Similarly, when a woman informs a
man that he was suckled along with so-and-so (the woman he
intends to marry), then when the mufti gives judgement that
it is permissible to marry her because of the lack of the proper
number [of witnesses]6 the judgement will not remove doubt.
Rather he must have caution even if people give him a judgement
in his favour, and Allah knows best.
6 A single witness is not enough, so while a single such witness would not
be sufficient to prevent such a marriage it would raise a doubt.
111122

--- Page 127 ---
111122 113

--- Page 128 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
28. Taqwa of Allah,
Hearing and Obedience
Abu Nahih al-‘Irbad ibn Sariyah1 î said, “The Messenger
of Allah @ admonished us with an admonition by which
the hearts became frightened and the eyes flowed with
tears, so we said, ‘Messenger of Allah, it is as if it were a farewell
admonition, so advise us.’ He said, ‘I advise you to have taqwa of
Allah, mighty is He and majestic, and to hear and obey even if
a slave is given command over you. Whoever of you lives will see
many disagreements, so you must take hold of my Sunnah and
the Sunnah of rightly guided2 khulafa who take the right way3.
Bite on it with the molar teeth. Beware of newly introduced
matters, for every newly introduced matter is an innovation,
and every innovation is a going astray, and every straying is
in the Fire.” Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi narrated it and he
[at-Tirmidhi] said, “A good sahih hadith.”
Commentary
In his saying, “He admonished us,” admonition is to cause
fear.
In his saying, “And from which the eyes flowed with tears,” i.e.
they wept and cried.
His saying @ “You must take hold of my Sunnah”, i.e. “at the
time of disagreements in affairs cling to my Sunnah”.
“Bite on it with the molar teeth,” which are the back teeth. It
1 He became a Muslim very early on. He was one of the people of the
Suffah, the veranda of the mosque of the Prophet @ and one of those who
longed for the meeting with Allah. He died in Sham in 75 AH. He narrated 31
hadith.
2 Mahdiyyeen means ‘rightly guided’.
3 Rashidin which I have translated as ‘who took the right way’ is often
mistranslated as ‘rightly guided’ which has a passive sense, whereas it has an
active meaning.
111144

--- Page 129 ---
28. Taqwa of Allah, Hearing and Obedience
has been said, “The canine teeth.”4 When man bites with the
molar teeth it is as if he gathers together [and bites with] all
his teeth, so that it is a rhetorical device. A part of biting on the
Sunnah is to take hold of it and not to follow the views of the
people of caprice and innovations. ‘addou “bite!” is from ‘adda
“he bit”, ya’addu “he is biting/he bites”, and it is with fathah (a)
on the letter ‘ayn. Written with the dammah (‘u’ i.e. ‘uddu!) it is a
mistake. For that reason you say, “Treat your mother with good
nature (barra!), Zayd!” which is from barra “he treated with good
nature”, yabarru “he treats with good nature” and you do not say
burru! with a dammah (u) on the ba.
“And the Sunnah of rightly guided khulafa who take the right
way” ô meaning the four, who are: Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman
and ‘Ali.
4 It has also been said that the wisdom teeth are meant.
111144 115

--- Page 130 ---
111166

--- Page 131 ---
29. A Comprehensive Hadith on Action
29. A Comprehensive Hadith on Action
Mu’adh ibn Jabal î said, “I said, ‘Messenger of Allah
tell me about an action which will enter me into the
Garden and remove me far from the Fire’. He said,
‘You have asked about a tremendous thing, and it is easy for
one for whom Allah, exalted is He, makes it easy: [it is] that you
worship Allah without associating anything with Him, establish
prayer, produce zakah, fast Ramadan, and perform Hajj of the
House’. Then he said, ‘Shall I not show you the doors of good?
Fasting is a shield, and sadaqah extinguishes error as water
extinguishes fire, and the prayer of a man in the middle of the
night,’ and then he recited, ‘Their sides eschew their beds’ until
he reached, ‘… what it used to do.’1 Then he said, ‘Shall I not
tell you about the head of the matter, its central pillar and the
uppermost part of its hump?’ I said, ‘Yes, Messenger of Allah.’
1 Surat as-Sajdah: 16-17. “Their sides eschew their beds as they call on their Lord
in fear and ardent hope. And they give of what We have provided for them. No self
knows the delight that is hidden away for it in recompense for what it used to do.”
111166 117

--- Page 132 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
He said, ‘The head of the matter is Islam, and its central pillar
is prayer, and the summit of its hump is jihad.’ Then he said,
‘Shall I not tell you of the foundation (milak) of all of that?’ I
said, ‘Yes, Messenger of Allah.’ He took hold of his tongue and
said, ‘Restrain this.’ I said, ‘Prophet of Allah, are we taken to
task for what we talk about?’ And he said, ‘May your mother
be bereft of you, Mu’adh! Does anything throw people into the
Fire on their faces’ – or he said, ‘on their nostrils’ – ‘except the
harvest of their tongues?’” At-Tirmidhi related it and said, “A
good sahih hadith.”
Commentary
His saying @ “And the uppermost part of its hump,” i.e. the
highest part of it. The milak (foundation) of a thing, with kasrah (i)
on the letter mim, i.e. its purpose. His saying @ “May your mother
be bereft of you”, i.e. “may she lose you,” and the Messenger of
Allah @ did not intend the supplication literally, rather that it
is a custom of the Arabs in conversation. The “harvest of their
tongues” is their crimes against people by their attacking their
honour and walking about with tales, etc. The crimes of the
tongue are: backbiting, telling stories, lying, slander, the word
of disbelief, mockery and breaking promises. Allah, exalted is
He, says, “It is deeply abhorrent to Allah that you should say what you
do not do.”2
2 Surat as-Saff: 3.
111188

--- Page 133 ---
30. Obligations and Limits
Abu Tha’labah al-Khushni Jurthum ibn Nashir1 î
narrated that the Messenger of Allah @ said, “Truly
Allah has made obligations obligatory so do not waste
them, and He has defined limits so do not transgress them,
and He has forbidden some things so do not violate them, and
He was silent about some things as a mercy to you, not out of
forgetfulness, so do not investigate them.” A good hadith which
1 He was one of the famous Companions and one of those who were present
at the Pledge of Allegiance of ar-Ridwan underneath the tree in the sixth year
of the Hijrah. He died in Sham in 95 AH. He narrated forty hadith.
111188 119

--- Page 134 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
ad-Daraqutni and others narrated.
Commentary
His saying @ “And He has forbidden some things so do not
violate them,” i.e. do not enter into them.
The meaning of his saying @ “And He was silent about some
things as a mercy to you,” has already been spoken about.
112200

--- Page 135 ---
31. Zuhd – Doing Without
Abu’l-‘Abbas Sahl ibn Sa’d as-Sa’idi1 î said, “A man came
to the Prophet @ and said, ‘Messenger of Allah, show me
an action which if I do it, Allah will love me and people
will love me’. He said, ‘Do without the world and Allah will love
you, and do without that which people have and people will
love you.” A good hadith which Ibn Majah and others narrated
with good isnads.
1 His name used to be Hazn (Rugged or Rough) and so the Prophet @
named him Sahl (Smooth). The Prophet @ died when Sahl was fifteen years
old. He was the last of the Companions to die in Madinah, dying in 91 AH. He
narrated 188 hadith.
112200 121

--- Page 136 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
Commentary
In his saying @ “Do without the world and Allah will love you,”
doing without (zuhd) means leaving that of the world for which
one has no need, even if it is halal and to confine oneself to
sufficiency2. Scrupulousness (wara’) means to leave ambivalent
things.
They say that the most intelligent of people are the people
of doing without, because they love what Allah loves and dislike
amassing the world which Allah dislikes, and they employ rest for
themselves. Ash-Shafi’i said, may Allah, exalted is He, show him
mercy, “If a bequest had been made for the most intelligent of
people, then it would have been turned to the people of doing
without.”
One of them said:
“Be one who does without that which men’s hands possess
you will become beloved to all of mankind.
Do you not see the hunting bird is forbidden their provision
2 Sufficiency must be understood in the context of the obligation of every
Muslim man and woman to pay the zakah, which presupposes that, if possible,
one will have untouched, for a year, the nisab upon which zakah becomes
obligatory, i.e. 20 gold dinars, 200 silver dirhams, and/or the requisite number
of cattle, and/or the quantities of grain and dates, etc.
We live in an age of spectacular greed in which enormously voracious
individuals devour the earth. At the other end of the scale a characteristic
disease of the age is anorexia, the constant denial to oneself of much-needed
nourishment and the perpetual attempt to reduce one’s needs. All the
statements on doing without need to be understood somewhere well within
these two extreme positions. The thought that it is possible to quietly live on
a little halal income is becoming increasingly unlikely for the huge majority
of the earth’s population. Indeed a major struggle is needed to bring about
any sort of halal economy within which anyone could have the luxury of living
with the traditional virtues of zuhd (doing-without). For that there is needed
an Islamic people, great numbers of whom each possess the nisab and pay the
zakah on it, as opposed to the capitalist model of a few extraordinarily wealthy-
through-enormous-debt individuals and families, and a great many indebted
wage and salary earners.
112222

--- Page 137 ---
31. Zuhd – Doing Without
so it becomes a leader, in the laps, [as if] a close
relative3?”
Ash-Shafi’i î said in blame of the world:
“Whoever tastes the world, then I have tasted it,
its sweetness (‘adhb) and its torment (‘adhab) were driven
to us,
but I only see it as a deception and falsehood,
just as the mirage that appears in the middle of the
waterless desert.
It is nothing but an absurd corpse,
on which there are dogs who desire its enticements.
If you avoid it you will be peace to its people,
but if you are enticed by it, its dogs will struggle with you.
Repulse the surpluses of affairs, for they are
forbidden to embark on for the person of taqwa.”
His saying, “Forbidden to embark on for the person of taqwa,”
shows that rejoicing in the world is forbidden, which al-Baghawi
announced clearly in his commentary on His words, exalted is
He, “They rejoice in the life of the dunya.”4 Moreover, what is meant
by that which is blameworthy of the world is seeking more than
sufficiency. As for seeking sufficiency that is obligatory. One of
them said, “That is not worldly; the world is what is in excess over
sufficiency,” and he sought to prove it by His saying, exalted is He,
“To mankind the love of worldly appetites is painted in glowing colours:
women and children…”5 so that then His saying, exalted is He,
indicates what was mentioned previously of seeking expansion
[of the world rather than seeking what one needed of it]. Ash-
Shafi’i said, may Allah, exalted is He, show him mercy, “Seeking
increase in the halal is a punishment by which Allah tries the
people of tawhid.” One of them said:
“There is no house for the man after death in which he will
live,
3 The trained hunting bird is prevented from eating its prey, but it is
honoured and has a place in the family.
4 Surat ar-Ra’d: 23.
5 Surah Ali ‘Imran: 14
112222 123

--- Page 138 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
Except for the one which before death he was building.
If he builds it well his dwelling will be pleasant,
but if he builds it badly, its builder has failed.
The self desires the world and already knows,
that doing-without in it is abandoning that which is in it.
Plant the roots of taqwa as long as you continue to exert
yourself,
and know that after death you will meet them.”
Moreover, after that, if one rejoices in it because of boasting,
competing and becoming insolent to people then that is
blameworthy, but whoever rejoices in it because it is a part of
the bounty of Allah upon him then that is praiseworthy. ‘Umar
î said, “O Allah, we do not rejoice except in that which You
provide us.”
Allah, exalted is He, has praised those who are moderate6
in their living and He said, exalted is He, “Those who, when they
spend, are neither extravagant nor mean,”7 and he said @ “Whoever
asks Allah to choose for him [with the du’a of istikharah] will
not fail, whoever seeks advice will never regret, and whoever is
moderate will never be in need.”8 It used to be said, “Moderation
in the way of living suffices you for a half of provision.” Iqtisad
(moderation) is contentment with sufficiency. One of the people
of right action said, “Whoever earns wholesomely [in a halal
fashion] and spends with intention (or moderately), advances
[for himself] a bounty.”
6 Muqtasidin and iqtisad are from the root qasada “he intended or purposed”.
The essential thought in iqtisad is to spend with intention and purpose, and
thus ‘moderately’ and, as the ayah in Surat al-Furqan makes clear, in between
the two extremes of extravagance and meanness. It is this significant word
which has been twisted by being translated as ‘economics’ (a study which was
regarded as a pseudo-science when introduced into Oxford University) and
thus to the even more abhorrent ‘Islamic Economics’, an umbrella term for
the innovation of Islamic Banking in order to introduce usury into the heart
of the shari’ah.
7 Surat al-Furqan: 67.
8 At-Tabarani narrated it in al-Awsat.
112244

--- Page 139 ---
32. Causing Harm and Returning Harm
Abu Sa’id Sa’d ibn Malik ibn Sinan al-Khudri1 î narrated
that the Messenger of Allah @ said, “There is [to be] no
causing harm nor returning harm.” It is a good hadith
which Ibn Majah, ad-Daraqutni and others narrated with isnads.
Malik narrated it in the Muwatta in a mursal2 form from ‘Amr
1 He went to battle along with the Messenger of Allah @ twelve times. He
was one of the great Companions and one of their men of knowledge. He
was charged by Sayyiduna Abu Bakr î with the task of compiling the first
copy of the Qur’an, and subsequently by Sayyiduna ‘Uthman î with the job
of preparing the edition upon which all other copies are now based. He died
in Madinah in 74 AH when he was 94 years old, and is buried in al-Baqi’. He
narrated 1,170 hadith.
2 Mursal means narration of the hadith without mentioning the name of
112244 125

--- Page 140 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
ibn Yahya from his father from the Prophet @ and he omitted
Abu Sa’id. It has different paths [of transmission] some of
which reinforce others.
Commentary
His saying @ “There is [to be] no causing harm”, i.e. let none of
you cause harm to another without right nor [without it being in
retaliation for] any previous injury [from the other party].
His saying @ “Nor returning harm,” i.e. do not harm whoever
harms you, and if someone abuses you do not abuse him, rather
seek your rights from a judge without [returning the] abuse. If
two men abuse each other or slander each other, let mutual
retaliation not take place, but rather let each one take his due by
means of a judge. In the hadith literature there is narrated from
him @ that he said, “Each of the two who abuse each other has
what he said, and the one who began is in the wrong as long as
the wronged one does not transgress with extra abuse.”
the Companion who is the ultimate source of transmission from the Prophet
@. It is wrongly thought by modern Muslims that the mursal is intrinsically weak,
but in the old practice hadith were sometimes transmitted as mursal because
the narrator had them from more than one companion, and to ascribe it to
one companion would have weakened his narration.
“Al-A’mash said, “I said to Ibrahim [an-Nakha’i], ‘Give me something from
Ibn Mas’ud with a chain of transmission.’ He said, ‘If I narrate you something
from a man from ‘Abdullah that is what I heard. If I say, “‘Abdullah said…”
then it is from more than one person.’” ‘Abd al-Hayy al-Laknawi, At-Ta’lıq
al-Mumajjad
112266

--- Page 141 ---
33. Claimants and Counter-Claimants
Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with both of them,
narrated that the Messenger of Allah @ said, “If people were
to be given according to what they claim, men would claim
people’s property and blood, but clear evidence is required
of a claimant and an oath is required of one who denies [the
claim].” A good hadith which al-Bayhaqi and others related as
above, and a part of it is in the two Sahih books.
Commentary
In his saying @ “Clear evidence is required of a claimant and an
oath is required of one who denies [the claim],” clear evidence is
required of a claimant only because he claims something which
112266 127

--- Page 142 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
contradicts the actual state of affairs, and one assumes innocence
[on the part of a defendant] until guilt is proven1. Only an oath
is required of one against whom a claim is made2, because his
claim accords with the actual state of affairs and he is considered
innocent until proven guilty.
Some matters are excluded. A claimant without evidence is
accepted with respect to that which can only be known by means
of him:
i. Such as a father’s claim that he needs to keep [his
daughter] chaste [by insisting that she marry],
ii. The claim, supported by circumstantial evidence, of an
impetuous and legally incompetent person [literally ‘an idiot’]
to [having contracted] a marriage [because such a person
needs the consent of his guardian to contract a marriage],
iii. The claim of a hermaphrodite of [having either]
feminine or masculine gender,
iv. A child’s claim of having attained puberty through having
had a wet dream,
v. A near relative’s claim of his lack of property in order that
he can take some maintenance,
vi. The claim of an indebted person of difficulty in [repaying]
a debt which is binding on him and for which there is no direct
(monetary) recompense, such as a dowry of a wife, warranty
[e.g. for work done], and the [liability incurred for the] value
of something destroyed,
vii. A woman’s claim that her iddah has come to an end,
with her avowal [of the end of the periods of purity] or by her
giving birth,
viii. Her claim that she has become eligible [for remarriage
after the triple divorce from her first husband, because of her
second husband having consummated the marriage] and that
she has then been divorced [thus allowing her to remarry her
1 A translation of what is an almost telegraphic Arabic phrase which holds
some of the meaning of English phrases such as “possession is nine-tenths of
the law”, etc.
2 He doesn’t have to have evidence or proof.
112288

--- Page 143 ---
33. Claimants and Counter-Claimants
first husband],
ix. The claim of one entrusted [with some goods] that the
entrusted [goods] were destroyed, lost or stolen, etc.,
x. Similarly, the oath called qasamah [which is sworn fifty
times by the relatives of a murdered man when there is not
evidence of two witnesses to the murder]3 is excluded [from
the need for clear evidence], because oaths are required of a
claimant when there is suspicion.
xi. The divorce called li’an4 [is excluded too] for [in it]
a husband slanders [his wife by accusing her of adultery
without witnesses] and lays a curse on himself [if he is lying]
and thus the hadd punishment [for slander] is dropped [from
the husband]5,
xii. A [husband’s] claim of sexual intercourse during
a period of impotence, for if the woman denies him, the
husband is believed in his claim unless the wife is a virgin,
xiii. Similarly if he claimed that he had intercourse with her
in the period of sworn abstinence from intercourse,6
xiv. Similarly, one who abandons prayer, if he says that
he prayed in the house, [he is not required to show clear
evidence],
xv. Someone who refuses to pay zakah [to zakah collectors] if
he says, “I paid it myself” except when the poor [who should
have received his zakah] deny it and they are a limited number,
3 The accused may avert retaliation by fifty oaths of his innocence. See the
Muwatta of Imam Malik, Book 44, the Oath of Qasamah.
4 In which a husband swears four oaths that his wife committed adultery
and a fifth oath that the curse of Allah be upon him if he has lied, and she
averts punishment from herself if she swears four oaths that she did not
commit adultery and a fifth oath that the curse of Allah is upon her if she has
lied. They are divorced and can never remarry in any circumstances.
5 Clear evidence in any accusation of adultery is a confession repeated
four times, or the testimony of four trusted Muslim witnesses to the act of
intercourse. Even if three such witnesses were to testify they would be flogged
for slander.
6 If a man swears not to have intercourse with his wife and abstains for four
months, he must then declare his intent or divorce her.
112288 129

--- Page 144 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
then he must produce clear evidence.7
xvi. Similarly, someone who claims poverty and asks for
zakah is given it and not made to swear an oath, as opposed
to when he claims to have dependents, for that requires clear
evidence.
If someone eats on the thirtieth day of Ramadan and claims
that he saw the moon8 then that is not accepted from him if he
claims it after eating, because he may only be trying to avert
punishment from himself. If he claims that before eating, then it
is accepted from him and he is not to be punished, but he ought
to eat secretly, since his witnessing alone is not acceptable.9
7 Muslims are required to pay their zakah to the collectors appointed by
the Amir. Ibn Juzayy says in the sub-heading of the chapter on zakah from
al-Qawanin al-Fiqhiyyah, “It is an obligation and one of the pillars of Islam, and
whoever denies that it is an obligation is a disbeliever, and whoever refuses it
then it is taken from him by force, and if he resists it then he is to be fought
until he pays it.” Furthermore, he says, “If the Imam [the Khalifah] is just
[i.e. he can be trusted to pay it to the categories permitted to receive it] it is
obligatory to pay the zakah to him, and if he is not just but it is not possible
to divert the payment of the zakah from him then it must be paid to him and
that discharges the obligation. If it is possible to divert the payment of the
zakah from him then the owner of it pays it to those who are worthy. It is then
recommended that he not undertake the payment of it himself for fear of
being praised for it.”
8 The Muslim leader is the one to declare the beginning and the end of
Ramadan. He does that on the advice of a qadi to whom Muslim witnesses have
testified that they have seen the moon and the qadi is satisfied on examination
that the witnesses are acceptable and the sighting is genuine. In the case
of clear cloudless conditions, then the sighting must be a mass sighting by
significant numbers of the population. If it is cloudy, then there arises the
case of two just Muslim witnesses and their interrogation by the qadi to verify
the authenticity of their evidence.
9 This is the position of ash-Shafi’i, but Malik and Ahmad ibn Hanbal say
that the solitary person who sees the moon of Shawwal, “does not break his
fast, for fear of suspicion falling on him”. From al-Qawanin al-Fiqhiyyah of Ibn
Juzayy al-Kalbi.
According to the school of Malik, Ibn Juzayy said, “If he does break the fast
there is nothing against him in that which is between him and Allah, however
if he is discovered he is punished if he is suspected [of just trying to break the
fast].” From al-Qawanin al-Fiqhiyyah.
113300

--- Page 145 ---
33. Claimants and Counter-Claimants
In his saying, “And an oath is required of one who denies [a
claim],” this oath is called “an oath of restraint (patience)” and
“[an oath] which plunges [one who swears it falsely into serious
wrong action and thus into the Fire].” It is called an oath of
restraint (sabr) because it holds a possessor of a right back from
his right, and holding back is a form of restraint. In that sense
it is said of a person who has been killed and who is held back
from burial that he is restrained.10 He said @ “Whoever swears a
restraining oath, by which he cuts off the property of a Muslim
man, and in which he has deviated from the truth, will meet
Allah and He will be angry with him.”11
This oath is only with respect to things past, and it occurs in
many places in the Tremendous Qur’an, for example His saying,
exalted is He, “They swear by Allah that they said nothing”12, and
of it there is His saying, exalted is He, informing about the
disbelievers, “Then they will have no recourse except to say, ‘By Allah,
our Lord, We were not mushrikun.’”13 Another example of it is His
saying, “Those who sell Allah’s contract and their own oaths for a paltry
price…”14. It is recommended that the judge should recite this
ayah at the time of taking an oath from a disputant in order
that he should abstain [from a false oath or one in which he has
doubt].
10 i.e. musabbar from sabr ‘patience’
11 Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated it.
12 Surat at-Tawbah: 74.
13 Surat al-An’am: 23.
14 Surah Ali ‘Imran: 76.
113300 131

--- Page 146 ---
34. Seeing Something Objectionable
Abu Sa’id al-Khudri î said, “I heard the Messenger of Allah
@ saying, ‘Whoever of you sees something objectionable
then let him change it with his hand, and if he is not
able then with his tongue, and if he is not able then with his
heart, and that is the weakest iman’.” Muslim narrated it.
Commentary
It is not meant by his saying @ “that is the weakest iman,” that
the one who is incapable [of strong action or words] has weaker
iman than someone else. What is meant is only that that is the
lowest of iman. That is because action is the fruit of iman, and that
the highest fruit of iman, in the realm of forbidding that which
113322

--- Page 147 ---
34. Seeing Something Objectionable
is objectionable, is to prevent it by hand, and then if he is killed
he is a shaheed.1 Allah, exalted is He, says, recounting the words of
Luqman, “My son, establish salat and command what is right and forbid
what is wrong and be steadfast in the face of all that happens to you.”2
For one who is able, it is obligatory to forbid with the tongue
even if he will not be listened to, just as when he knows that if
he greets someone they will not return the greeting yet he must
still greet [them].
If it is said that his saying @ “And if he is not able then with
his tongue, and if he is not able then with his heart,” requires
that one who is not able is not permitted to try and change
[the wrong] with anything other than the heart, and that the
command [here] signifies the obligation [to change it with the
heart, rather than signifying recommendation], then the answer
has two aspects:
First is that what is understood is further qualified by His
saying, exalted is He, “And be patient with what happens to you,”
(i.e. that he ought to act or speak out and then be patient with
what happens to him as a result).
Second, is that the command [to change the wrong with
the heart] removes the [guilt of] wrongdoing [from someone
who did not actively change the wrong or speak against it]
but it does not remove the recommendation [that it should be
done with hand or tongue].
If it is said that denying it with the heart does not change the
objectionable, so what is the meaning of his saying @ “Then [he
must change it] by his heart”? (i.e. how can he ‘change’ it?), the
answer to that is that he should reject it and not be contented
with it, and he should occupy himself with remembrance of
Allah. Allah, exalted is He, praises those who do that when He
says, “And who, when they pass by worthless talk, pass by with dignity”3
1 A shaheed is a witness, i.e. in the sense that he witnesses the truth and
bears wit ness to it. The shaheed enters the Garden immediately on his death
without resurrection and without awaiting the Reckoning.
2 Surah Luqman: 17.
3 Surat al-Furqan: 72.
113322 133

--- Page 148 ---
35. Brotherhood
Abu Hurairah î said, “The Messenger of Allah @ said, ‘Do
not envy each other, do not bid against each other, do not
hate each other, do not turn your backs on each other,
and let none of you sell upon the sale of another. Be slaves of
113344

--- Page 149 ---
35. Brotherhood
Allah, brothers. A Muslim is the brother of a Muslim, he does
not wrong him, fail to assist him, lie to him nor despise him.
Taqwa is here,” and he pointed to his breast with his hand three
times, “It is sufficient evil for a man that he should despise his
brother Muslim. All of a Muslim is sacred for a Muslim, his
blood, his property and his honour.” Muslim narrated it.
Commentary
About his saying @ “Do not envy each other,” it has previously
been mentioned that there are three types of envy.
An-najash [from which derives “do not bid against each other”]
means originally to raise and increase, and it is that someone
increases the price of an article [by entering the bidding]
because of jealousy of another, and it is forbidden because it is
dishonest and deceitful.
His saying @ “Do not turn your backs on each other” [means]
let none of you give up on his brother even if he sees him turning
his back on him. He said @ “It is not permitted for a Muslim to
forsake his brother for more than three nights, so that they meet
and this one turns away and this one turns away. The best of the
two of them is the first to greet.”1
The form of the ‘sale upon the sale of his brother’ is that his
brother should sell something and he should tell the purchaser to
annul the sale, so that he can sell him the like of it or something
better than it for less than that price. Purchase upon purchase
is [also] forbidden, i.e. that he should tell the seller to annul the
sale so that he can buy it for a higher price. Similarly, offering
for sale on top of one’s brother’s offering for sale is forbidden.
All of this enters into this hadith in order to elucidate the [full]
meaning which is to hate each other and to turn the back on each
other. To restrict the prohibition to the sale of one’s brother [by
taking the word ‘brother’ in the sense of another Muslim] would
1 Malik, al-Bukhari, Muslim, at-Tirmidhi and Abu Dawud narrated it.
113344 135

--- Page 150 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
require that it is not forbidden [to sell] on the sale of a kafir, which
is a view of Ibn Khalwayh, but the correct position is that there is
no difference [between a contract made with a Muslim or with a
kafir], since it falls under fulfilling obligations and contracts.
By his saying @ “‘Taqwa is here’ and he pointed to his breast with
his hand three times” he meant the heart. There has already been
mentioned his saying @ “Certainly in the body there is a lump of
flesh which when it is sound the whole body is sound….”2
His saying, “And he does not fail to assist him,” i.e. upon his
commanding the good and forbidding the wrong, or upon his
seeking one of his rights, rather he helps, aids and protects him
from harm as much as he can.
His saying, “Nor despise him,” i.e. he does not pass judgement
about himself that he is better than someone else, rather he
should reckon that others are better than him or he should pass
no judgement, because the end result is hidden and a slave does
not know what the seal of his actions will be. If he sees a Muslim
youth, he should reckon that he is better than him, considering
the fact that he has less wrong actions than him. If he sees
someone who is older than him, he should reckon him to be
better than him, considering the fact that he emigrated before
him in Islam. If he sees a kafir he should not pass judgement on
him that he is certain to go to the Fire, because of the possibility
that he will accept Islam and die as a Muslim.
His saying @ “It is sufficient evil for a man that he should despise
his brother,” meaning that this is a tremendous evil and that the
punishment of this wrong action will suffice the perpetrator of
it.
With respect to his saying @ “Every Muslim…”, [we could
mention that] he said @ on the Farewell Pilgrimage, “Your blood,
your properties and your honour are sacred to you like the
sanctity of this day of yours, in this month of yours, in this land of
yours.”3 Al-Karabisi sought to show by this hadith that backbiting
2 See hadith six.
3 Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated it.
113366

--- Page 151 ---
35. Brotherhood
and attacking the honour of Muslims is a major wrong action,4
either because of the indication given [here] by its being joined
together with blood and wealth, or because of the comparison in
his words, “Like the sanctity of this day of yours, in this month of
yours, in this land of yours,” for [the violation of] which Allah,
exalted is He, has threatened a painful torment, when He said,
exalted is He, “Those who desire to profane it (the haram of Makkah)
with wrongdoing, We will let them taste a painful punishment.”5
4 i.e. like drinking alcohol, adultery, theft, unlawful killing, usury, etc.
5 Surat al-Hajj: 25.
113366 137

--- Page 152 ---
113388

--- Page 153 ---
36. Easing Someone’s Distress
36. Easing Someone’s Distress
Abu Hurairah î narrated that the Prophet @ said,
“Whoever removes an anxiety of the world from a
believer, Allah will remove an anxiety of the Day of
Resurrection from him. Whoever makes it easy for someone in
difficulty, Allah will make it easy for him in the world and the
Next Life. Whoever conceals [the wrong action of] a Muslim,
Allah will conceal his [wrong action] in the world and the
Next Life. Whoever travels on a path seeking in it knowledge,
Allah will smooth for him a path by it to the Garden. People do
not gather in one of the houses of Allah, reciting the Book of
Allah, studying it together and teaching it to each other, but
that tranquillity descends upon them, mercy covers them, the
angels encircle them, and Allah remembers them among those
who are with Him. Whoever’s deeds hold him back will not be
advanced by his lineage.” Muslim narrated it in this wording.
Commentary
In his saying @ “Whoever removes an anxiety of the world
from a believer, Allah will remove an anxiety of the Day of
Resurrection from him,” there is a proof that it is recommended
to make [non-interest] loans [to people in difficulty], that it is
recommended to free prisoners from the hands of disbelievers
by wealth which one gives them, to free a Muslim from the hands
of tyrants and to free him from prison. It is said that Yusuf ï
when he came out of the prison, wrote over its door, “This is the
grave of the living, the malicious joy of one’s enemies, and the
testing of friends.”
Undertaking to guarantee one who is in financial difficulty
is also included in this category, and standing surety in lieu of
him, for someone who is able to do it. As for someone who lacks
capacity, he must not do it. One of the companions of al-Qaffal
113388 139

--- Page 154 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
said, “In the Tawrah it is written, ‘Standing surety is blameworthy;
the beginning of it is regret, the middle of it is blame, and the
end of it is debt’.”
If it is said that Allah, exalted is He, says, “Those who produce a
good action will receive ten like it,”1 and that this hadith shows that a
good action is rewarded with the like of it, because it is rewarded
with the removal of one anxiety of the Day of Resurrection and
not ten, then the answer has two aspects. First, is that this is
from the category of what is understood from a number (mafhum
al-‘adad)2, and the judgement attached to a number does not show
the negation of increase and decrease. Second, each distress of
the Day of Resurrection comprises many terrors, difficult states,
and abundant dangers, and these terrors are in excess of ten and
multiples of it.
In the hadith there is another concealed secret which is made
apparent by means of [elucidating] that which is inherent: there
is a promise through the informing of the Truthful One @ that
whoever removes a Muslim’s distress will have a good seal [on his
life’s actions] and that he will die in Islam, because disbelievers
will not be shown mercy in the Abode of the Next Life and
no distress will be removed from them. In the hadith there is
an indication of the good news contained in the expression
transmitted from the Owner of the Standard [on the Last Day],
so in this tremendous promise let the trusting trust, “It is for the
like of this that all workers should work!”3
The best action is to remove distress, and in the hadith there
is a proof that it is recommended to conceal [the wrong action
of] a Muslim, if one discovers that he is doing something wrong.
Allah, exalted is He, says, “People who love to see filth being spread
1 Surat al-An’am: 160.
2 Mafhum al-’adad is a type of mafhum al-mukhalafah, a term from usul
al-fiqh. The immediate sense here is that if ten is mentioned it does not mean
nine or eleven are ruled out. The Imam’s position is that the number ten is
not exact and is not meant to rule out the possibility of a lesser or greater
number.
3 Surat as-Saffat: 61.
114400

--- Page 155 ---
36. Easing Someone’s Distress
about concerning those who have iman will have a painful punishment
both in the dunya and the akhirah.”4 [Also] it is preferable if a human
being does a wrong action, that he himself should conceal [it].
As for those who witness adultery there is disagreement about
them in two ways, one of which is that it is preferable for them
to conceal [the adultery], the second is that they should bear
witness. Someone made a distinction and said, “If they see some
benefit in bearing witness, then they should bear witness, and if
[they see benefit] in concealing [the adultery] then they should
conceal it.”
In the hadith there is also a proof of the preferability of
walking in search of knowledge. It is related that Allah, exalted
is He, revealed to Dawud, upon him blessings and peace, “Take
hold of an iron staff and two iron sandals, and walk in search of
knowledge until the sandals are torn and the staff is broken.” In it
also there is an indication that one should serve men of knowledge
and cling to their company, travel with them and gain knowledge
from them. Allah, exalted is He, says, in narrating about Musa,
upon him blessings and peace, that he said [to Khidr], “May I
follow you on condition that you teach me some of the right guidance you
have been taught?”5
Know that this hadith has conditions, of which there is [that
one must hold to] action according to what one knows. Anas
said î “The concern of men of knowledge is being mindful, the
concern of fools is narration.” The poet said:
“The admonitions of the admonisher will not be accepted,
until first of all his [own] heart keeps it in mind.
O my people! Who is more wrongdoing than an admonisher
who contradicts what he has said in public?
He makes his goodness public among people,
and opposes the Merciful when he is alone.”
Another condition is to spread it. Allah, exalted is He, says, “If a
party from each group of them were to go out so they could increase their
knowledge of the deen they would be able to notify their people when they
4 Surat an-Nur: 19.
5 Surat al-Kahf: 66.
114400 141

--- Page 156 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
returned to them.”6 It is narrated that Anas î said that the Prophet
@ said to his companions, “Shall I not inform you of the most
generous of the generous, and I am the most generous of the
children of Adam? The most generous of them after me is [first]
a man who learns a science and then spreads it; Allah will raise
him up on the Day of Resurrection as a nation by himself, and
[second] a man who is generous with himself in the way of Allah
until he is killed.”7
A condition is to give up boastful competitiveness and
contentiousness. It is narrated from the Prophet @ that he said,
“Whoever seeks knowledge for four [reasons] enters the Fire:
in order to compete boastfully with people of knowledge, or to
dispute with fools, or to take property and wealth by it, or to turn
people’s faces towards him.”8
Another condition is to anticipate a reward [from Allah] for
spreading it, and to give up being mean with it. Allah, exalted is
He, says, “Say, ‘I do not ask you for any wage for it.’”9
A condition is not to be too proud to say, “I do not know.” He
said @ even with the exaltedness of his degree, when he was
asked about the Hour, “The one who is asked knows no more
than the one who asks.”10 He was asked about the Ruh and he
said, “I do not know.”
A condition is self-abasement. Allah, exalted is He, says, “The
slaves of the All-Merciful are those who walk lightly on the earth.”11 He
said @ to Abu Dharr, “Abu Dharr, bear in mind the advice of
your Prophet; perhaps Allah will benefit you by it. Show humility
towards Allah, mighty is He and majestic, perhaps He will raise
you up by it on the Day of Resurrection. Greet whomever you meet
of my ummah, good or bad, dress yourself with coarse clothing,
and do not want by that anything but the face of Allah, exalted is
6 Surat at-Tawbah: 122.
7 Abu Ya’la and al-Bayhaqi narrated it.
8 Ibn Majah narrated it.
9 Surat al-An’am: 90.
10 See Hadith two.
11 Surat al-Furqan: 63.
114422

--- Page 157 ---
36. Easing Someone’s Distress
He, and perhaps pride and scorn will not find an entrance into
your heart.”
A condition is to bear in mind the possibility of harm [to
oneself] in spreading good counsel, and modelling oneself
on the right-acting first generations in all of that. Allah says,
“Command what is right and forbid what is wrong and be steadfast
in the face of all that happens to you.”12 He said @ “No prophet has
suffered what I have suffered.”13
A condition is that one should intend by one’s knowledge [to
give it to] the one who is in most need of teaching, just as one
intends by sadaqah from one’s wealth [to give it to] the most
needy and then the most needy [after them], for whoever revives
an ignorant person by teaching him knowledge is as if he had
revived all people. One thing that has been said about awakening
a neglectful person and making him return to obedience is:
“Whoever returns a fleeing slave who has taken fright,
Then the One who forgives will pardon his wrong action.”
His saying, “But that tranquillity descends upon them,” and
as-sakinah “tranquillity” is on the form fa’ilah of the word sukun
“stillness”, i.e. tranquillity from Allah. Allah, exalted is He,
says, “Only in the remembrance14 of Allah can the heart find peace,”15
and remembrance of Allah is sufficient honour, [i.e.] Allah’s
remembering the slave in the Highest Assembly, and for this
reason it is said:
12 Surah Luqman: 17.
13 Abu Nu’aim related it in the Hilyat al-Awliya. It is sometimes wrongly
thought from its title that the book of Abu Nu’aim is a series of biographies of
Sufi saints. Rather it contains biographical outlines of the first generations of
Muslims up until the author’s own generation which he narrates by the criteria
of the science of hadith. Thus it has biographies of both the Imams of fiqh
and of early saliheen such as Dhu’n-Nun al-Misri and Ibrahim ibn Adham. It is
illustrative that we find Dhu’n-Nun to have been one who learnt the Muwatta by
heart directly from Imam Malik.
14 Dhikr in Arabic means both “mention” and “remembrance”, the former
being outer and the latter inner. Allah says, “Remember Me – I will remember you.”
(Surat al-Baqarah: 151). Dhikru’llah – ‘Remembrance of Allah’ – is here taken
to mean Allah’s remembering the slave.
15 Surat ar-Ra’d: 28.
114422 143

--- Page 158 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
“Be plentiful in remembrance of Him on earth,
continuously,
so that you might be remembered in heaven when you
remember.”
It has been said:
“An hour of remembrance – know it! – is abundance and
wealth,
and an hour of distraction is bankruptcy and poverty.”
His saying @ “Whoever’s deeds hold him back”, means that
even if he has a noble lineage, his lineage will not hasten him
to the Garden. The one who acts in obedience, even if he is an
Abyssinian slave, has precedence over the inactive, even if he is a
Qurayshi noble. Allah, exalted is He, says, “The noblest among you
in Allah’s sight is the one with the most taqwa.”16
16 Surat al-Hujurat: 13. ‘Noblest’ also means ‘most generous’.
114444

--- Page 159 ---
37. Good and Bad Actions
Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with both of them, narrated
from the Messenger of Allah @ in that which he related from
his Lord, blessed is He and exalted, “Allah has written the
good and bad actions, then He explained that. Whoever intends
to do a good action but does not do it, Allah writes it down with
114444 145

--- Page 160 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
Himself as a complete good action. If he intends to do it and
does it, Allah writes it down with Himself as ten good actions,
up to seven hundred multiples [of it], up to many multiples [of
it]. If he intends to do a wrong action then does not do it, Allah
writes it down with Himself as a complete good action. If he
intends to do it and then does it, Allah writes it down as a single
wrong action.” Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated it in their two
sahih books exactly like this.
Look my brother – may Allah grant us grace and guide us and
you to the vastness of the kindness of Allah, exalted is He, –
and consider these words. His words “with Himself” indicate
His taking trouble with it. His word “complete” is in order to lay
stress on it, and to emphasise the strength of His concern for it.
He said about the wrong action which he [the person] proposes
to do and later abandons, “Allah writes it down with Himself as
a complete good action” and he emphasised it with “complete”.
“And if he does it Allah writes it down as a single wrong action”
and he laid stress on its littleness by the word “single” and he did
not emphasise it with “complete”. To Allah belongs the praise
and the favour bestowed. We cannot enumerate His praise, and
by Allah success is obtained.
Commentary
About his saying @ “Allah writes it down with Himself as ten
good actions, up to seven hundred multiples [of it], up to many
multiples [of it],” al-Bazzar narrated in his Musnad that he @ said,
“Actions are seven [types]: two actions which make obligatory,
and two actions which are one for one, and an action the good of
which is [rewarded] with ten, and an action the good of which is
[rewarded] with seven hundred multiples, and an action whose
reward none but Allah, exalted is He, can enumerate. As for the
two actions which make obligatory, they are kufr1 and iman. Iman
1 Kufr is literally ‘covering over’ and it also means ‘ingratitude’.
114466

--- Page 161 ---
37. Good and Bad Actions
makes the Garden obligatory and kufr makes the Fire obligatory.
As for the two actions which are one for one, then whoever
proposes to do a good action and does not do it, Allah writes
it down for him as a good action, and whoever does a wrong
action Allah writes it down against him as one wrong action. As
for the action for which there is seven hundred multiples, it is
the dirham [spent] in jihad in the way of Allah. Allah, exalted
is He, says, “…[like] a grain which produces seven ears; in every ear
there are a hundred grains.”2 Moreover, Allah, glorious is He and
exalted, mentioned that He multiplies [rewards] for whomever
He wills in excess of that, and He said, exalted is He, “And if there
is a good deed Allah will multiply it and pay out an immense reward
direct from Him.”3 The ayah and hadith, i.e. his words @ “up to
many multiples,” show that ten-fold up to seven hundred-fold
are words which are not being used to limit [the reward], and
that He will multiply [the reward] for whomever He wills, and
give from Himself that which cannot be numbered or counted.
Glory be to the One Whose favours cannot be enumerated and
Whose blessings cannot be counted, and gratitude is owed to
Him and blessing and bounty. As for the seventh it is fasting.
Allah, exalted is He, says, “Every action of the son of Adam is for
him except for fasting, for it is for Me and I will recompense it.”4
No-one knows the reward of fasting but Allah.5
2 Surat al-Baqarah: 261. “The metaphor of those who spend their wealth in the
Way of Allah is that of a grain which produces seven ears; in every ear there are a
hundred grains”.
3 Surat an-Nisa: 40.
4 Al-Bukhari narrated it.
5 Ibn Juzayy said “It has been said that every good action has a limited
reward, from ten-fold up to seven-hundred fold, except for patience whose
reward has no limit. That is because of Allah’s words ‘Only the patient are paid
their reward without reckoning’.” There is no contradiction here since patience is
an intrinsic part of fasting and it has been said that fasting is an intrinsic part
of patience.
114466 147

--- Page 162 ---
38. Optional Acts and Wilayah
Abu Hurairah î said, “The Messenger of Allah @ said,
‘Allah, exalted is He, says, “Whoever shows enmity to
a close friend of Mine, then I declare war on him. My
slave does not draw closer to Me with anything more beloved to
Me than that which I have made obligatory upon him. My slave
114488

--- Page 163 ---
38. Optional Acts and Wilayah
continues to draw closer with optional extra acts until I love
him. When I love him, I am his hearing with which he hears,
his sight with which he sees, his hand with which he grasps and
his foot with which he walks. If he asks Me I will definitely give
him, and if he seeks refuge with Me I will definitely give him
refuge”.’ ” Al-Bukhari narrated it.
Commentary
What is meant here by “close friend” in his saying @ from his
Lord, exalted is He, “Whoever shows enmity to a close friend of
Mine, then I declare war on him,” is the mu’min. Allah, exalted
is He, says, “Allah is the protector (wali)1 of those who have iman.”2
Whoever harms a believer, then Allah announces war on him, i.e.
Allah informs him that He is at war with him, and when Allah,
exalted is He, wages war on a slave He destroys him, so let man
beware of opposing any Muslim.
In his saying, exalted is He, “My slave does not draw closer to Me
with anything more beloved to Me than that which I have made
obligatory upon him,” there is proof that performance of obligatory
acts is better than optional extra acts. It has been narrated in the
hadith literature that, “The reward of the obligatory is seventy
times better than the reward of optional acts.”3
About His saying, exalted is He, “My slave continues to draw
closer with optional extra acts until I love him,” the people of
knowledge ô have made a simile. They have said that the simile of
one who performs extra optional acts along with the obligatory,
and the simile of someone else, is a man who gives to one of his
two slaves a dirham with which to buy fruit and gives to another
a dirham with which to buy fruit. One of the two slaves went
and bought fruit, then placed it in a fruit basket and, of his own
1 The root has the sense of closeness, friendship and protection, as well as
giving rise to words to do with governance.
2 Surat al-Baqarah: 258.
3 Ibn Khuzaymah narrated it.
114488 149

--- Page 164 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
volition, sprinkled on it some herbs and sweet smelling plants.
Then he went and placed it before his master. The other went and
bought fruit in the orchard, then came and placed it before his
master on the ground. Each slave was obedient, but one of them,
of his own volition, gave a fruit basket, herbs and sweet smelling
plants and so became more beloved to the master. Whoever prays
extra optional prayers4 along with the obligatory prayers becomes
more beloved to Allah. Love from Allah is [His] willing the best
[for one]. Whenever He loves His slave He occupies him in His
remembrance and obedience, He protects him from shaytan, He
occupies his limbs in acts of obedience, He makes hearing the
Qur’an and dhikr beloved to him and makes hearing singing and
instruments of diversion detestable to him. He becomes one of
those about whom Allah has said, “When they hear worthless talk they
turn away from it,”5 and [about whom] He said, exalted is He, “And,
who, when the ignorant speak to them, say, ‘Peace’,”6 i.e. if they hear
some indecent talk from them they turn away from it, and they
say something with which they are safe [from wrong action]. He
guards his sight from those things which it is forbidden [to see]
and he does not look at that which is not permitted for him, so
his looking becomes a look of reflection and consideration, and
he does not see anything which has been created but that he has
a proof from it of its Creator. ‘Ali said î “I do not see anything
but that I see Allah, exalted is He, before it.” The meaning of
consideration is to pass, through reflection, from creations to the
power of the Creator, so that he glorifies [Allah] at that, declares
His sanctity and vastness, the movements of his two hands and
his feet all become for the sake of Allah, exalted is He, he does
not walk for a purpose which does not concern him, does not
4 The Imam uses the prayer as an illustration, but of course it can equally
well be applied to all of the obligations, the ordinary transactions and to jihad.
If anyone discharges his obligatory duties and then of his own volition freely
gives more than that, whether it is sadaqah, extra fasting, extra Hajjs and
‘Umrahs, or extra effort for the revival and establishment of the deen, he will
come within the meaning contained in this hadith, and Allah knows best.
5 Surat al-Qasas: 55.
6 Surat al-Furqan: 63.
115500

--- Page 165 ---
38. Optional Acts and Wilayah
do anything profitless with his hand, rather his movements and
stillnesses are all for Allah, exalted is He, and so he is rewarded
for that in his movements, stillnesses and in all of his actions.
His words, exalted is He, “I become his hearing…,” may mean,
“I am the One who protects his hearing and sight, the grasp of
his hand, and his foot from shaytan,” or it may be “I am in his
heart when he hears, sees and grasps, so when he remembers
Me, he withholds himself from acting for other than Me.”
115500 151

--- Page 166 ---
39. Mistakes, Forgetfulness and
Coercion
Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with both of them, narrated
that the Messenger of Allah @ said, “Allah has passed over, for
my sake, my ummah’s mistakes and their forgetfulness and that
which they are forced to do.” A good hadith which Ibn Majah,
al-Bayhaqi and others narrated.
Commentary
His saying @ “Allah has passed over, for my sake, my Ummah’s
mistakes and their forgetfulness and that which they are forced to
do,” i.e. He passes over the guilt of their mistakes, forgetfulness
and that which they are forced to do. As for the judgement on
115522

--- Page 167 ---
39. Mistakes, Forgetfulness and Coercion
mistakes, forgetfulness and that which they are forced to do, it
is not lifted, for even if something was destroyed by mistake or
something entrusted to one was lost out of forgetfulness one is
bound to honour the liability [one incurred]. Being forced to
commit adultery and murder are both excluded [from being
passed over by Allah, exalted is He], and they are not permitted
through coercion.1 Excluded from forgetfulness is that which
man takes hold the cause of, for he is guilty by doing it because
of his shortcoming.2 This hadith contains benefits and important
matters about which I have com piled a work but which this book
is not capable [of containing].3
1 They will not be forgiven even if done under compulsion. They involve not
only the rights of Allah but the rights of the person who has been wronged.
2 It means that if one becomes involved in something that one knows is
going to cause one’s forgetfulness of an obligation then one is not excused
because of that forgetfulness. In modern Arabic it could be construed that it
refers to taking substances that cause forgetfulness, but it is not certain that
this was its meaning to the author.
3 Contracts undertaken under coercion are not binding. An instance of
this was that Imam Malik held very vigorously that a divorce pronounced
under compulsion is not binding. He was forbidden by the Abbasid governor
of Madinah from stating this publicly and when he continued to do so, he
was humiliated and punished in public, but refused to recant. The governor
and the people of Madinah all knew that a consequence of this judgement of
Malik was that the oath of allegiance taken under compulsion was thus not
binding.
115522 153

--- Page 168 ---
40. Be in the World as if a Stranger
Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with both of them, said,
“The Messenger of Allah @ took hold of my shoulder and
said, ‘Be in the world as if you were a stranger or someone
115544

--- Page 169 ---
40. Be in the World as if a Stranger
traversing a way’.” And Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with
both of them, used to say, “When you enter upon the evening,
do not expect the morning, and when you get up in the
morning, do not await the evening, and take from your health
for your sickness, and from your life for your death.” Al-Bukhari
narrated it.
Commentary
His saying @ “Be in the world as if you were a stranger or
someone traversing a way,” i.e. do not depend on it nor take it
as your homeland, do not consider abiding in it nor become
attached to any of it except that with which the stranger concerns
himself when he is not in his own country and wants to leave it to
return to his family. This is what Salman al-Farisi meant î when
he said, “My intimate friend @ told me that I must only take from
the world as if it were the provisions of a rider.”
Something said about doing-without in the world is:
“Do you build as those who live forever,
and yet your staying in it, if you would only think, is little?
Certainly in the shade of the Arak trees there is sufficient
for whomever is in it, and [then] the saddled camel comes
to him [ready for departure].”
Another thing that is said about doing-without in the world:
“You hope to live forever in an abode which does not endure
forever,
and have you heard of a shadow which doesn’t move?”
Another said:
“You are imprisoned in it and you love it!
How can you love that in which you are imprisoned?
Do not be distracted by an abode in which you are.
It will separate you one day from that by which you were
distracted.
It will feed you food, and soon
115544 155

--- Page 170 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
it will give you the taste of that which you have been fed.”1
In the hadith there is an indication [that one should] curtail
one’s wishful thinking, hasten to repentance and prepare for
death. If a man wishes for something let him say, “If Allah wills,”
for Allah, exalted is He, says, “Never say about anything, ‘I am doing
that tomorrow,’ without adding ‘If Allah wills.’”2
In his saying @ “Take from your health…” he @ told him to
take advantage of hours of health by doing right action in them,
for he will be incapable of fasting and [optional] prayer, etc., for
reasons which come with ill health and old age.3
In his saying @ “And from your life for your death,” he @ told
him to send provision on [for himself]. This is like His saying,
exalted is He, “And let each self look to what it has sent forward for
Tomorrow.”4 One should not overstep the bounds in it until death
takes one and one says, “My Lord, send me back again so that perhaps
I may act rightly regarding the things I failed to do!”5 Al-Ghazali said,
may Allah show him mercy, “The son of Adam’s body is like the
net with which he earns right actions, so that if he earns good and
then dies, it [the good] suffices him and he no longer needs the
net, i.e. the body from which he has parted by his death. There is
no doubt that when man dies, his appetites are cut off from the
world, and his self desires right action because it is the provision
of the grave. If he has some, it is enough for him. If he has none,
he seeks to return from it to the world to take provision from it.
That is after the net has been taken away from him, so that it will
be said to him, ‘It is extremely improbable, because it has gone.’
He will remain always bewildered, regretting his remissness in
1 In Surat al-‘Ankabut: 55, Allah, exalted is He, says, “Taste what you were
doing”.
2 Surat al-Kahf: 23.
3 The sick person is permitted not to fast Ramadan but he will have to
make it up later. However, frail old people may choose to feed people instead
of fasting, and according to the Malikis they do not have to feed people. The
obligatory prayer may never be abandoned even if one has to perform it lying
down in a sickbed, but sickness may prevent one from extra acts of ‘ibadah.
4 Surat al-Hashr: 17.
5 Surat al-Muminun: 99.
115566

--- Page 171 ---
taking provision before the net was taken from him.” For this
reason the Messenger of Allah @ said, “Take from your life for
your death,” and there is no power [to avert evil] nor strength [to
do good] except by Allah the Exalted, the Vast.
115566 157

--- Page 172 ---
41. None of You Believes until…
Abu Muhammad ‘Abdullah1 ibn ‘Amr ibn al-‘As, may Allah
be pleased with both of them, said, “The Messenger
of Allah @ said, ‘None of you believes until his desire
follows that with which I have come.” A good sahih hadith which
we have narrated in the book al-Hujjah with a sahih isnad.
Commentary
His saying @ “None of you believes until his desire follows that
1 ‘Abdullah was one of the great Companions. He was one of their men
of knowledge and he did without the world and fasted and prayed a great
deal more than the obligatory fasts and prayers. He was one of those who
memorised most from the Messenger of Allah @ and thus who narrated the
most hadith – 700. He was with his father, ‘Amr ibn al-‘As, until his father died
in Egypt, and then he moved to Sham, then to Makkah. He became blind in
later years. He died in Makkah in 65AH at seventy-two years of age.
115588

--- Page 173 ---
41. None of You Believes until…
with which I have come,” means that a person must measure his
conduct by the Book and Sunnah, and he must oppose his own
desire and follow that which the Messenger of Allah @ brought.
This is the equivalent of His words, exalted is He, “When Allah
and His Messenger have decided something it is not for any mu’min
man or woman to have a choice about it.”2 No one along with Allah,
mighty is He and majestic, and His Messenger @ has command
nor desire.
From Ibrahim ibn Muhammad al-Kufi there is that he said,
“I saw ash-Shafi’i in Makkah giving legal judgements to people,
and I saw Ishaq ibn Rahwayh and Ahmad ibn Hanbal present
there. Ahmad said to Ishaq, ‘Come along, so that I can show you
a man the like of whom your eyes have never seen’. Ishaq said to
him, ‘The like of whom my eyes have never seen?’ He said, ‘Yes,’
and brought him to stand in front of ash-Shafi’i,” and he told the
story up until the point where he said, “Then Ishaq went on to
the assembly of ash-Shafi’i and asked him about renting houses
in Makkah,3 and ash-Shafi’i said, “This is permissible according
to us. The Messenger of Allah @ said, ‘Has ‘Aqil left us a house?’
Ishaq said, ‘Yazid ibn Harun told us from Hisham from al-Hasan
that that was not his view, and ‘Ata and Tawus did not hold that
view.’ Ash-Shafi’i said, ‘Are you the one about whom the people
of Khurasan claim that you are their faqih?’ Ishaq said, ‘So they
claim.’ Ash-Shafi’i said, ‘How much I would like that someone
other than you should stand in your place. I would order that his
ears should be rubbed [because he doesn’t hear properly]. I say,
“The Messenger of Allah @ said,” and you say, “Ata, Tawus, al-Hasan
and Ibrahim did not have that opinion?”4 Does anyone have an
2 Surat al-Ahzab: 36.
3 The crux of the argument is whether the people of Makkah truly are
the owners of their houses and thus free to rent them out and sell them, etc.
Ash-Shafi’i showed that, in the texts he quotes, the ownership clearly belongs
to them and thus they must be free to rent their own houses out.
4 In some cases, however, the early fuqaha held that the view of a
contemporary faqih or body of fuqaha was a better proof of the Sunnah of the
Messenger of Allah @ than some of the hadith. One of the strongest of the
Madinan principles of fiqh is that the agreement of the people of Madinah of
115588 159

--- Page 174 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
argument with the Messenger of Allah @?’ Then ash-Shafi’i said,
‘Allah, exalted is He, says, “It is for the poor of the Muhajirun who were
driven from their homes”5 and are the homes attributed to owners
or to someone other than owners?’ Ishaq said, ‘To owners.’ Ash-
Shafi’i said, ‘Then the word of Allah, exalted is He, is the truest
of words, and the Messenger of Allah @ said, ‘Whoever enters
the house of Abu Sufyan is safe,’ and ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab î
bought the House of the Two Alcoves [or chambers].’ Ash-Shafi’i
mentioned many groups of the Companions of the Messenger of
Allah @. Ishaq said to him, ‘equally for those who live near it and those
who come from far away’6 and ash-Shafi’i said, ‘What is meant by
that is the Mosque [of Makkah] especially, which is that which is
around the Ka’bah. If it had been as you claim, it would not have
been permissible for anyone to seek his stray [camel] among the
houses of Makkah, nor to confine the sacrificial animals, nor to
drop dung, but however this pertains to the Mosque especially.’
Ishaq was silent and did not speak, so ash-Shafi’i stopped
speaking to him.”
the Companions, Followers and Followers of the Followers as shown in their
practice is a more sure evidence of the Sunnah than are hadith, more sure
even than some of those we know as sahih hadith. They encapsulated this
perspective in the saying, “One thousand narrating from one thousand is more
sure than one narrating from one.” The ‘one thousand’ is the transmission
of the Sunnah in practice and in knowledge by the people of Madinah of the
first generations. ‘One from one’ is the narration of hadith by hadith scholars.
The fuqaha of Madinah would sometimes quote a hadith and then pass a
judgement which contradicted it, doing that in order to demonstrate that
they had not passed their judgement in ignorance of the hadith. There are
instances of this in the Muwatta of Imam Malik, which can be very surprising
to modern Muslims. For the most thorough exposition of this see Root Islamic
Education by Shaykh Abdalqadir al-Murabit.
5 Surat al-Hashr: 8.
6 Surat al-Hajj: 25.
116600

--- Page 175 ---
42. O Son of Adam
Anas î said, “I heard the Messenger of Allah @ saying,
‘Allah, exalted is He, says, “Son of Adam, as long as you
call on Me and hope in Me, I will forgive whatever comes
from you [of wrong actions] and I do not care. Son of Adam,
even if your wrong actions were to reach to the clouds of the
sky and then you were to seek forgiveness of Me I would forgive
you. Son of Adam, even if you were to come to Me with nearly
116600 161

--- Page 176 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
the earth in wrong actions and then later you were to meet Me,
not associating anything with Me, then I would definitely bring
you nearly as much as it [the earth] in for giveness”.’” At-Tirmidhi
narrated it and said, “A good sahih hadith.”
Commentary
In His saying, exalted is He, “The clouds (‘anan) of the sky,”
‘anan is with a fathah (a) on the ‘ayn which is without a diacritical
point, and it is said that it is ‘clouds,’ and it is said that it is that
of it which ‘anna [is apparent] to you, i.e. ‘is apparent’ when you
raise your head.
His saying, exalted is He, “And then you seek forgiveness of Me,
I will forgive you” is the equal of His saying, exalted is He, “Anyone
who does evil or wrongs himself and then asks Allah’s forgiveness will find
Allah Ever-Forgiving, Most Merciful.”1 Seeking forgiveness must be
accompanied by turni ng [to Allah in repentance from the wrong
action]. Allah, exalted is He, says, “ Ask your Lord for forgiveness
and then make tawbah to Him,”2 and He said, “Turn to Allah every one
of you, mu’minun, so that hopefully you will have success.”3
Know that the meaning of istighfar is seeking forgiveness, and that
is the seeking forgiveness done by the people of wrong action. One
may also seek for giveness for a shortcoming in showing gratitude
and that is the seeking forgiveness of close friends [of Allah] and
people of right action. It may also be for neither of those reasons
but purely out of gratitude and that was his seeking forgiveness
@ and the seeking forgiveness of the prophets, on them the
blessings of Allah and His peace.
He said @ “The chief [supplication for] seeking forgiveness is,
‘O Allah, You are my Lord, there is no god but You. You created
me and I am Your slave and I am upon Your contract and Your
promise as much as I am able. I seek refuge with You from the
1 Surat an-Nisa’: 110.
2 Surah Hud: 2.
3 Surat an-Nur: 31.
116622

--- Page 177 ---
42. O Son of Adam
evil that I have done. I acknowledge to You Your blessing upon
me and I acknowledge my wrong action, so forgive me, for no one
forgives wrong actions except for You’.” He said @ to Abu Bakr î
“Say, ‘O Allah, I have wronged myself with much injustice,’ – and
in another version ‘with great injustice’ – ‘and no one forgives
wrong actions but You, so forgive me with a forgiveness from
Yourself, and show mercy to me, truly You are the All-Forgiving,
the Most Merciful’.”
116622 163

--- Page 178 ---
This is the last of that which Allah the Nobly Generous has
made easy by way of abridgement preserving the meanings, and
the praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.
164
