
--- Section 1 ---
1. An-Nawawi, Imam
ISBN 1897940 74 2
Layout by: Bookwright:
Web site: http://www.bogvaerker.dk/Bookwright
Email: bookwright@bogvaerker.dk
Printed and bound by:

--- Page 5 ---
Acknowledgements
I gratefully acknowledge the help of two scholars: Dr. Yasin
Dutton of Edinburgh University, and Shaykh Ali Laraki both
of whom gave generously of their time and knowledge, and
unravelled several seemingly intractable problems. My thanks
also to Imam Yahya Muhammad al-Hussein of Dublin for help in
one particularly obstinate passage. However, since I was unable
to show the complete typescript to any of the above the mistakes
are mine, and the praise for its merits belongs to Allah.

--- Page 6 ---
vvii

--- Page 7 ---
Preface to the First Edition
This translation was prepared from two editions: the first
edited and annotated by Abdullah Ibrahim al-Ansari,
and published by Maktabah Jiddah, the second edition
from Maktabah al-Qudsi in Cairo.
The original intention of the Imam was to put these hadith and
his explanatory text in front of the Muslims in a way which would
be useful to them, and so for that reason we have attempted to
keep this translation accurate but not academic. To that end I
have not used the Arabic script at all except in two or three places
in which the Imam explains Arabic words and where phonetics
became more complicated than the Arabic.
As to the footnotes on the sources of the ayat and the hadith
and for biographies of the Companions, I have largely drawn
on the notes of Abdullah Ibrahim al-Ansari from the first of the
above-mentioned editions.
Since much Arabic writing is concise I have added extra
explanatory words in brackets [ ] if it seemed that the words
were implicit in the Arabic. Sometimes I added extra explanatory
comments of my own in parentheses ( ). If the matter seemed to
call for extra material I gave it a footnote.
Preface to the Second Edition
In this edition we include the Arabic texts of the forty hadith.
While doing that we took the opportunity to update a few matters
in the text, the most substantial of which is to use the translations
vvii vii

--- Page 8 ---
of the ayat of al-Qur’an al-Karim from The Noble Qur’an: a new
rendering of its meaning in English by Abdalhaqq and Aisha Bewley,


--- Section 2 ---
published by Bookwork, Norwich 1999. We do that because their
translation is based on the meanings always understood by the
Muslims as expressed in the classical tafsir literature. Besides
that, the Bewleys are also native English speakers and this is the
most readable translation of the meanings of the Qur’an and the
most direct.
Preface to the Third Edition
The most substantial change to this edition has been to name


--- Section 3 ---
the hadith, for example: 1. Intention, 2. Islam, Iman and Ihsan,
etc., and to use these names in the table of contents and the
headers to facilitate use of the book, for it is clear that this is a
book that ought to be used rather than read once and left.
vviiiiii

--- Page 9 ---
Translator’s Introduction
Imam an-Nawawi, may Allah show mercy to him, never
intended merely to record forty hadith in a book and
release them to the public. The book which he wrote was
his collection of forty-two hadith together with the absolute
minimum of fiqh and linguistic commentary which he felt
necessary for people not to misunderstand the import of these
hadith. Ibn ‘Uyaynah said, “Hadith are misleading except to
those who have fiqh.” Ibn Wahb said, “Every man of hadith who
has no imam in fiqh is astray. If Allah had not rescued us by
Malik and al-Layth we would have gone astray.”
It is clear from reading the hadith literature that the
Companions, who were pre-eminently men of fiqh, received their
Islam by means of what we would call ‘taqlid’ which continued
to be the means of Islam’s transmission from one generation
to the next. Taqlid is that people see with the eyes of the heart
something so overwhelmingly clear that they imitate it, whether
consciously or unconsciously. While this is not a decision to
abandon the intellect, this word is usually translated pejoratively
as ‘blind imitation’. Many modern Muslims imagine that we have
a wisdom superior to that because of living in a ‘more enlightened’
techno-scientific age. We place that concept in inverted commas
because our measure of all enlightenment is the noble conduct
of the Messenger of Allah @ and his Companions in Madinah,
a measure which shows this age to be one of the most barbaric
there has ever been.
Imam Malik is reported to have said, “Only that which was
vviiiiii ix

--- Page 10 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
effective for the first of this community will be effective for the
last of it.” For the Companions the encounter with the Prophet
@ was so extraordinary that they modelled themselves entirely
upon him, sometimes even in the smallest customs and actions.
As every parent witnesses, that is a major part of the process by
which children learn to become adult human beings. It is from
the very essence of the human being. Knowledge is not merely
sets of propositions and transmission is not just to convey those
propositions to another.
This is not to denigrate the author of this book or any of the
noble transmitters of traditional knowledge of this Muslim
community. If we were to examine the lives of the great people
of knowledge of our community we would find them to have
been overwhelmed by the luminous characters and behaviour of
the men and women from whom they learnt. For if the sciences
have not illuminated their transmitters there is little point in
transmitting them.
Thus we find Imam Malik, may Allah show mercy to him,
saying, “Knowledge is a light which Allah places where He will;
it is not much narration.” We must accept this from Malik since
his capacity for accurate narration of hadith is not in doubt, but
here he is calling us to something beyond texts and certainly
beyond isnads.
The unique achievement of the Prophet @ unparalleled in
all history before or since, is to have transformed the lives and
practice of the elite and the ordinary people of an entire city,
and from there to have transformed Arabia and the world. That
miracle continues in our time. Yet Madinah was the core group,
trained, educated and civilised by the last of the Messengers @.
The next generations learnt their Islam as a generation from
the Companions ô. That transmission was most concentrated
and authentic in Madinah. ‘Amal is the term which denotes the
actual practice of the people of Madinah. The Companions
transmitted it to the Followers, and they to the Followers of the
Followers. All of these generations further enriched the record
of the practice by their intelligent resolution of new issues in
xx

--- Page 11 ---
Translator’s Introduction
accordance with their profound knowledge of the Book and
the Sunnah. Most significantly, that record includes their mode
of transacting commercially without usury, the knowledge of
which sustained and enriched Muslim culture for centuries and
is desperately needed by the world today. The practice of the
people of Madinah of those first generations is itself the best
evidence of the Sunnah because it is like a mutawatir hadith
which has been transmitted by huge numbers of reliable people
of one generation to equally large numbers of reliable people of
the next. In this age the best result expected of the culture of
the solitary narrator is the well-meaning ‘good Muslim’ who is
himself only too aware that he is ineffectual.
Malik, along with his pre-eminence as a narrator of hadith,
recorded the ‘amal – the practice – so that it might be a wellspring
for civilisations to come, as it has been and as it will continue to
be insha’Allah. These hadith from the noble Imam an-Nawawi,
may Allah show mercy to him, make most sense when set within
the ‘amal of a dynamic and resurgent Islam like jewels in the
bezel of the ring.
Two further matters in particular need to be clarified, as they
constitute two of the warp threads on which the weft of this text
is woven and thus all of Islam. First is the issue of sadaqah. The
worst translation of this word is the Christian ‘charity’. It is a
salutary lesson for those Muslims rushing to embrace the Jews
and Christians as brothers from the ‘Abrahamic and monotheistic
faiths’ – an abhorrent concept covering over the Jews’ crimes of
slandering and murdering the prophets and men of Allah, and the
Christians’ idolisation of Sayyiduna ‘Isa ï – that over a century
ago a non-Muslim, the German philosopher Nietzsche, showed
how terminally sick Judaeo-Christian culture is. Nietzsche called
for a revaluation of all values. In his most thorough statement
of that analysis, The Antichrist, he had also begun to declare that
Islam does not share in that degeneracy. Perhaps if he had been
granted more years of sanity by the grace of Allah he might have
come to see that Islam is itself the very revaluation of all values
for which he had called. However, we have been disappointed in
xx xi

--- Page 12 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
some of our early translators into English who went out of their
way to prove that Islam is absolutely acceptable to the Jews and
the Christians. Thus these translators have wherever possible
taken hold of Christian ecclesiastical language to translate the
classic texts of Islam. Al-hamdulillah, more recent translators
have accepted that key Arabic terms are untranslatable and that
with the increasing familiarity with Arabic of English-speaking
Muslims it is simplest to leave words like ‘deen’, for example, rather
than choosing ‘religion’.
However, with a word such as ‘sadaqah’, we must remove a
misunderstanding that now adheres to the Arabic word itself.
That is that in current usage sadaqah is used for the extra optional
acts of generosity after the payment of zakah. However, even a
slight acquaintance with our heritage of tafsir and fiqh quickly
disabuses us of this erroneous notion. Sadaqah is the entire zone
which encompasses the obligatory zakah, the optional extra acts
of giving, and other acts such as establishing awqaf endowments,
but it is very often used exclusively for zakah itself. It is used in
these forty-two hadith both in the sense of zakah and extra acts
of generosity.
This is of importance to us in this age because, properly
speaking, the pillar of zakah does not exist. That is for a number
of reasons. The first reason is that zakah is not a charity. It is
certainly a noble intention to pay from one’s earnings in order to
discharge the obligation that one owes to Allah, but something
more is called for – a striving to recreate the authentic form of
zakah. Zakah is not a voluntary giving to the poor, but rather it
is an obligation of Islam. It is collected by the imams – i.e. the
khalifah and the amirs of the Muslims – by force if necessary. A
man may be fought and killed for refusing to pay the zakah as the
Imam states so unequivocally.
The second reason is that the zakah can only be taken in
something real which is itself halal and from a halal economy;
it must be paid in gold, silver, cattle, or grains, etc. If the
entire economy is based on usurious instruments, what zakah is
possible? I must refer the reader to the works of Umar Ibrahim
xxiiii

--- Page 13 ---
Translator’s Introduction
Vadillo, particularly The Return of the Gold Dinar, for a thorough
exposition of this matter. However, in summary it is that the
banknote and other credit instruments are entirely usurious
even before we consider the matter of interest, and may not be
used to pay zakah.
Let us not be sidetracked into the fruitless debates of amateur
‘ulama which so plague our age. Let us instead be a little political.
All these instruments are entirely the creation of the enemies of
Islam and are under their control. All banks, including equity
banks, which are sometimes called Islamic banks, operate under
usurious prerequisites that allow them to lend money created
out of nothing. Thus most of the currency of the paper-money
system that we use comes into circulation as a debt to the banks.
Neither the banknote, a usurious instrument, nor any kind of
promissory note (in Arabic called dayn) can be used to pay
zakah.
It is the individual obligation of every Muslim to restore that
pillar, since zakah is an individual obligation on every Muslim
man and woman. The Muslim must pay zakah in gold and silver.
We need no argument for the above. If any argument were
needed for the Dinar and Dirham, it would be sufficient to say
that they were the usage of the Messenger of Allah @ and of the
Companions and of all the right-acting generations of Muslims
up to our day, and that all the texts mention them and all of these
generations paid their zakah with them. Banks and paper money
are the invention of kuffar and they continue to impoverish us.
The return to the Islamic Dinar as the one world currency of the
Muslims is the beginning of our prosperity.
The second warp thread of our text is inextricably linked with
the first: it is the matter of leadership, authority and governance.
The abolition of the Khilafah is the other great bid’ah of our
time. It is an awkward fact of history that the very movement
which is most vocal in speaking out against bid’ah participated
treacherously with kuffar in the destruction of the Khalifate. The
story of that event is for the first time clearly exposed in the The
Return of the Khalifate by Shaykh Dr Abdalqadir as-Sufi, in which
xxiiii xiii

--- Page 14 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
he also outlines the route to its revival. The restoration of the
Khalifate and its amirates is an individual obligation on every
Muslim. Every single Muslim is obliged to pledge allegiance to a
leader, as is established in the Sunnah, and to obey him and pay
his zakah to him. That restoration will not proceed by the erection
of an Islamic State, but by the compelling imperative on each
Muslim to obey one worthy to lead. This is no more complicated
than the issue a group of Muslims face each prayer time; someone
is always found who is most fitted to lead the prayer and everyone
intuitively recognises the right man. Leadership is analogous to
that. If each Muslim community accepts and affirms its natural
leaders, from among the leaders of the leaders most assuredly
an Amir for the Muslims will emerge. This is the Sunnah of the
Muslims, just as representational democracy, constitutionalism
and republicanism are innovations of the Jews, Christians and
Freemasons. We need no excuse nor proof for choosing the
former and only a clear hypocrite could call us to the latter.
That is our situation. A pillar of Islam and the entire model of
Islamic governance-without-state have been demolished, and it is
the personal obligation of every Muslim and Muslimah to see them
restored. It is not from the fiqh of Islam to engage in an optional
act when the obligatory act has not been discharged, nor to
expend energy in combating things which are disapproved when
the haram is everywhere in evidence. It is a deviant understanding
of Islam that levels all of these distinctions of fiqh and reduces
matters to whether or not a text has an isnad. With this text we
are safe, however, since it comes from a man of knowledge who
was ‘amil, i.e. active in establishing the deen, and who was himself
a noted faqih.
For this text to make sense it must not be modified to fit into the
age in which we live as if the parameters of kufr were immutable,
rather it must be an instrument we use in shaping the age in which
we live for the sake of Allah.
xxiivv

--- Page 15 ---
Imam an-Nawawi’s Introduction
Praise belongs to Allah, Lord of the Worlds, the One Who
sustains the heavens and the earth, the One Who manages
all the creatures, Who sent the messengers – the blessings
of Allah and His peace be upon them all – to those who are
charged with responsibility, to guide them and to make clear
to them the laws of the deen, with absolute evidences and clear
proofs. I praise Him for all of His blessings, and I ask Him for
increase of His bounty and His generosity. I witness that there is
no god but Allah alone, no partner to Him, the Overpowering
One, the Nobly Generous, the Repeatedly Forgiving. I witness
that Sayyiduna1 Muhammad is His Slave and His Messenger,
and His Beloved and His Intimate Friend, the best of created
beings, the one who was honoured with the Mighty Qur’an –
the miracle which continues with the succession of years – and
with the Sunnahs which are illuminating for those who seek to
take the right way, Sayyiduna Muhammad who was singled out
with comprehensive words which gather many different levels
of meaning in them, and ease and liberality in the deen, the
blessings of Allah and His peace be upon him and upon the rest
of the prophets and messengers, and the families of all of them
1 Sayyid is translated in Lane’s Lexicon as chief, lord, master. Sometimes a
confusion arises in the use of a word such as ‘lord’ since that is also used to
translate ‘rabb’ although then in English it is conventional to use a capital letter,
i.e. ‘Lord’. Indeed, even the Arabic term ‘rabb’ may be used linguistically for
other than Allah, e.g. rabb al-bayt ‘the man of the house’, although by a specific
hadith it is frowned upon for a slave to address his master as ‘rabbi – my lord’ or
conversely for the master to address a slave as ‘abdi – my slave’.
xxiivv 1

--- Page 16 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
and the rest of the people of right action.
We have narrated from ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, ‘Abdullah ibn Mas’ud,
Mu’adh ibn Jabal, Abu’d-Darda’, Ibn ‘Umar, Ibn ‘Abbas, Anas ibn
Malik, Abu Hurairah and Abu Sa’id al-Khudri ô through many
different paths and varieties of narrations, that the Messenger of
Allah @ said, “Whoever preserves forty hadith for my ummah in
the affair of their deen, then Allah will raise him up on the Day
of Rising in the company of the people of fiqh2 and the people of
knowledge,” and in the narration of Abu’d-Darda’, “And I will be
for him on the Day of Rising an intercessor and a witness,” and in
the narration of Ibn Mas’ud, “It will be said to him ‘Enter through
whichever door of the Garden you will,” and in the narration of
Ibn ‘Umar, “He will be recorded in the company of the people of
knowledge and gathered in the company of the shuhada3.” Those
who memorise hadith agree that it is a weak hadith even though
it is narrated through many different paths.
The people of knowledge ô have compiled innumerable
books in this area. The first that I know to have compiled in this
area was ‘Abdullah ibn Mubarak, then later Ibn Aslam at-Tusi
the lordly man of knowledge, then later al-Hasan ibn Sufyan
an-Nasa’i and Abu Bakr al-Ajuri, Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn
Ibrahim al-Asfahani, ad-Daraqutni, al-Hakim, Abu Nu’aym, Abu
‘Abd ar-Rahman as-Sulami, Abu Sa’id al-Malini, Abu ‘Uthman
as-Sabuni, Abdullah ibn Muhammad al-Ansari, Abu Bakr
al-Bayhaqi, and a whole lot of other people of the first and later
generations who cannot be enumerated.
I sought the choice of Allah [through the du’a known as
istikharah] as to the matter of collecting forty hadith, modelling
myself on the noted people of knowledge and guardian
2 Fiqh is discrimination, the ability to discern what is obligatory,
recommended, permitted, disapproved, and forbidden. Its root meaning is
‘understanding’ and it is used in this way in the Noble Qur’an.
3 Shuhada’ ‘the witnesses’ are first and foremost those who die fighting in
the way of Allah, although other categories are mentioned in hadith. They
pass straight to the Garden at death and do not await the Resurrection or the
Reckoning.
22

--- Page 17 ---
Imam an-Nawawi’s Introduction
memorisers of Islam. The people of knowledge are unanimously
agreed that it is permissible to act upon a weak hadith in the
excellences of actions.4 However, along with that I do not depend
on this hadith, but rather on his saying @ in the sahih hadith,
“Let whoever of you witnesses convey it to those who are absent,”
and his words @ “May Allah illuminate a man who hears my
words and keeps them in mind and then conveys them just as he
heard them.”
Among the people of knowledge there are those who collected
forty hadith on the principles of the deen, some of them on the
derivative rulings, some on jihad, some on zuhd – doing without,
some on courtesies, some of them on public addresses, all of
which are worthy purposes, may Allah be pleased with those who
purposed them. My view was that I should collect forty hadith
more important than all of that, i.e. forty hadith encompassing
all of that, every one of which is one of the great principles of
the deen and which the people of knowledge have described in
such terms as “the deen revolves around it,” or “it is a half of
Islam” or “a third of it,” etc. Moreover, I decided to insist on
these forty being sahih, the majority of them being from the two
sahih books of al-Bukhari and Muslim, and that I should mention
them without their chains of transmission in order to make their
memorisation easy and to make the benefit derived from them
more universal, insha’Allah, exalted is He. Then I decided to
follow up each one with a chapter elucidating what is hidden in
their wordings. Whoever longs for the next life ought to know
these hadith because of the important matters they comprise,
and that which they encapsulate which draws attention to all the
acts of obedience, and that is obvious to whoever considers it. I
depend upon Allah and to Him do I commit myself and His is
the praise and the blessing, and by Him is success and protection
from error.
4 As opposed to the fundamentals and obligations.
22 3

--- Page 18 ---
4

--- Page 19 ---


--- Section 4 ---
1. Intention
1: Intention
The Amir al-Muminin Abu Hafs ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab1 î
said, “I heard the Messenger of Allah @ saying, ‘Actions
are only by intentions, and every man has only that
which he intended. Whoever’s emigration is for Allah and His
Messenger then his emigration is for Allah and His Messenger.
Whoever’s emigration is for some worldly gain which he can
acquire or a woman he will marry then his emigration is for
that for which he emigrated’.”
The two Imams of the hadith scholars narrated it – Abu
Abdullah Muhammad ibn Isma’il ibn Ibrahim ibn al-Mughirah
ibn Bardizbah al-Bukhari and Abu’l-Husein Muslim ibn
al-Hajjaj ibn Muslim al-Qushayri an-Naysaburi – in their two
sahih books which are the most sahih books compiled.
1 He was the first to be titled “the Amir al-Muminin”. The one who gave him
the kunya of Abu Hafs was the Prophet @ because of the severity that he saw in
him. Al-Hafs is a dialect meaning “Lion”. He gave him the title of “al-Farouq –
the Discriminator” because he used to distinguish and discriminate between
truth and falsehood. He was the first to declare his Islam openly, and by Him
Allah aided the da’wah of the Affirmed Truthful One when he said @ “O
Allah, strengthen Islam by the more beloved of the two men to you: ‘Umar ibn
al-Khattab or ‘Amr ibn Hisham (Abu Jahl).”
The reason for his Islam was that when the acceptance of Islam by his sister
Fatimah and her husband Sa’d ibn Zayd reached him, he intended to go and
punish them, then his sister recited to him something from the Qur’an and he
accepted Islam.
The Muslims greatly rejoiced in his acceptance of Islam and the Prophet
@ gave him good news of the Garden, and bore witness for him that Allah,
exalted is He, put the truth upon his tongue and in his heart, and that shaytan
fled from him. He is the best of the Companions after Abu Bakr î and they
agree unanimously about the great quantity of his knowledge, the strength of
his intelligence and of his doing-without, his humility and gentleness towards
the Muslims, and his great concern for whatever would benefit them. He has
many virtues. ‘Umar narrated five hundred and thirty nine hadith from the
Messenger of Allah @. He lived for sixty-three years and died as a shaheed,
stabbed by Abu Lu’lu’ah, and was buried along with the Prophet @. His khilafah
lasted ten years, six months and five nights.
4 5

--- Page 20 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
Commentary
The hadith indicates that intention is the measure for rendering
actions true, so that where intention is sound action is sound, and
where it is corrupt then action is corrupt.
Wherever there is action accompanied by intention, then there are
three states:
First, that one does it out of fear of Allah, exalted is He, and this
is the worship of slaves.
Second, that one does it seeking the Garden and reward, and this
is the worship of traders.
Third, that one does it out of modesty and shame before Allah,
exalted is He, discharging the right of service and discharging [the
duty of] gratitude, along with that seeing oneself falling short, and
that one’s heart is fearful because one does not know whether or
not one’s action is accepted. This is the worship of free people, and
the Messenger of Allah @ indicated it when ‘A’ishah, may Allah be
pleased with her, said to him, when he stood at night until his two
feet swoll, “Messenger of Allah, why do you impose this upon yourself
whilst Allah has forgiven you your earlier errors and any later ones?”2 He
said, “Shall I not be a grateful slave?”
If it is said, “Is it better to worship with fear or with hope?” It
must be said, “Al-Ghazali said, may Allah show mercy to him,
‘Worship with hope is better because hope causes love and fear
causes despair’.”
There are three divisions with respect to those who are sincere.
You must know that sincerity is exposed to the defect of conceit
and whoever is conceited about his action then his action is
invalid, as it is invalid if he is arrogantly proud. The second state
is that one does that seeking both the world and the next life.
One of the people of knowledge took the position that [in that
case] his action is rejected and he sought a proof of that from
his words @ in the Lordly hadith (hadith qudsi), “Allah, exalted
is He, says, ‘I am the most independent of partners, so whoever
does an action in which he makes other than Me a partner, then
2 Surat al-Fath: 2.
66

--- Page 21 ---


--- Section 5 ---
1. Intention
I am free of it’.”3 This was the position that al-Harith al-Muhasibi
took in the book ar-Ri’ayah. He said, “Sincerity is that you intend
Him by obedience to Him and that you do not intend any other
than Him.” There are two types of showing off: first, that one
only intends people by obedience to Him. The second is that
one intends people and the Lord of people, and both of these
invalidate action. The Hafidh Abu Nu’aym transmitted this
statement from some of the first communities in al-Hilyah. One
of them took a proof of that from His words, exalted is He, “The
Compeller, the Supremely Great. Glory be to Allah above all they associate
with Him.”4 For just as He is too great to have a wife and child and
a partner, He is too great to accept an action in which other than
Him is made a partner. He, exalted is He, is Greater and Great
and Supremely Great. As-Samarqandi said, may Allah show mercy
to him, “Whatever is done for the sake of Allah is accepted, and
whatever is done for the sake of people is rejected.” An example
of that is whoever prays Dhuhr, and intends by it to discharge
the duty of what Allah has made obligatory upon him, but he
lengthens its parts and its recitation and makes its organisation
beautiful for the sake of people; the basic part of the prayer is
acceptable, but its length and its beautification for the sake of
people are unacceptable because he intends people by them.
Shaykh ‘Izzu’d-Din ibn ‘Abd as-Salam was asked about someone
who prays and lengthens his prayer because of people, and he
said, “I hope that his action will not be invalid.” All of this is in
the case where the association of partners occurs in attributes
of the action. However, if it happens in the source of the action
so that one prays the obligatory prayer for the sake of Allah,
exalted is He, and for the sake of people, then one’s prayer is
not acceptable because of the association of partners in the very
source of the action.
Just as showing off can be in an action, it can be in the
abandonment of an action. Al-Fudayl ibn ‘Iyad said, “Leaving
3 Ibn Majah, Ibn Khuzaymah and al-Bayhaqi narrated it. Ibn Majah
narrated it (among the) trustworthy.
4 Surat al-Hashr: 23.
66 7

--- Page 22 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
an action because of people is showing off, and doing an action
because of people is associating a partner with Allah, and
sincerity is that Allah should protect one from both of them.”
The meaning of what he said, may Allah show mercy to him, is
that whoever resolves on an act of worship and leaves it for fear
that people may see it, then it is a form of showing off since he
gave up an action because of people. However, if he gave it up
in order to pray it in solitude this is recommended and desirable
unless it is an obligatory prayer or an obligatory zakah, or he is
a man of knowledge upon whom people model themselves, for
being open about an act of worship in these cases is better.
Just as showing off invalidates action, so does seeking good
report, which is that one does an act for Allah in solitude and
then later tells people what one did. He said @ “Whoever makes
others hear [of his actions] Allah will make others hear of him,
and whoever makes a show [of his actions] Allah will make a
show of him.”5 The people of knowledge say that if one is a man
of knowledge upon whom people model themselves and one
mentions it in order to encourage the listeners to action so that
they might act in accordance with it, then there is no harm in it.
Al-Mirzabani said, may Allah show mercy to him, “The one who
prays needs four qualities so that his prayer will be raised up [to
Allah]: presence of the heart, witnessing of the intellect, stillness
in the basic elements and submission of the limbs. Whoever
prays without the presence of heart is distracted, whoever prays
without the witnessing of the intellect is forgetful, whoever prays
without humility of the limbs is mistaken, whoever prays without
stillness in the basic elements is uncouth, and whoever prays with
all these elements has fulfilled the prayer.”
By his saying @ “Actions are only by intentions” he meant acts
of obedience aside from acts which are permissible. Al-Harith
al-Muhasibi said, “Sincerity is not relevant for permitted actions
because they are not acts of drawing near [to Allah] nor do
they lead to drawing near, for example raising up buildings for
5 Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated it.
88

--- Page 23 ---


--- Section 6 ---
1. Intention
no [higher] purpose other than frivolity. However, if it is for a
purpose such as mosques, aqueducts and ribat-fortresses then
they are desirable and recommended [acts and not merely
permissible].” He said, “There is no sincerity in an act which is
forbidden nor in something frowned upon, such as someone who
looks at that which is not permitted for him to look at, claiming
that he looks at it in order to reflect upon the workmanship of
Allah, exalted is He, for example, one who looks at a beardless
youth. There is no sincerity in this, indeed there is no act of
drawing near [to Allah] in it at all.” He said, “Truthfulness in
the attribute of the slave is in the matching of the secret and the
public, the outward and the inward. Truthfulness is realised by
realising all of the stations and states, so much so that sincerity
needs truthfulness, and truthfulness does not need anything,
since the reality of sincerity is intending Allah, exalted is He,
by the act of worship. One may intend Allah by the prayer but
be neglectful of the presence of the heart in it. Truthfulness is
intending Allah, exalted is He, by the act of worship along with
the presence of the heart with Him. Every true one is sincere, but
not every sincere one is true. That is the meaning of ‘union and
separation’, since he has separated from other than Allah and
united with the presence by Allah. It is the meaning of isolation
from what is other than Allah and adornment with the presence
before Allah i.”
His saying @ “Actions are only by intentions” carries the
possibilities of “the soundness of actions are only …” or “the
rendering of actions sound…” or “the acceptance of actions…” or
“the perfection of actions…”. This was what Imam Abu Hanifah
took, may Allah be merciful to him. One excludes from actions
those of the category of removal, such as removing dirt, returning
property obtained through extortion and loans, conveying a
present, etc., for the soundness of these actions does not depend
upon the intention having been made authentic, rather the
reward for them depends upon having intended them as acts of
drawing near. For example, one who feeds his animal, if he does
so in obedience to the command of Allah, exalted is He, will be
88 9

--- Page 24 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
rewarded, but if he intends by it preservation of his wealth then
there is no reward for that, as al-Qarafi said. The exception to
that case is the horse of a man fighting jihad, for when he ties
it up in the way of Allah, if it drinks and he did not intend to
give it water he will be rewarded for that, as is narrated in Sahih
al-Bukhari, and similarly for one’s wife. Also locking the door
and extinguishing the lamp upon going to sleep, if one intends
by them obedience to the command of Allah one is rewarded,
and if one intends some other thing, then one will not.
You must know that ‘intention’ is a word for ‘purpose’. It is
said, “May Allah intend good for you,” i.e. “May He purpose it
for you.” Intention in the shari’ah is to purpose a thing coupled
with the doing of it. If one purposes it and then does it later it is
‘resolve’.
Intention is made a part of the shari’ah in order to distinguish
customary actions from acts of worship, or to distinguish one
act of worship from another. An example of the former is sitting
in the mosque, which is customarily intended for rest but could
also be meant as worship if the intention is for i’tikaf .6 That which
distinguishes custom from worship is intention. Similarly one
customarily intends by a complete washing of the body to clean
the body, but the intention can also be as an act of worship (i.e.
ghusl). That which distinguishes these two cases is the intention,
which the Prophet @ indicated when he was asked about the man
who fought in order to show off, the man who fought defensively
and the man who fought courageously, as to which of them is
fighting in the way of Allah, exalted is He? He said, “Whoever
fights so that the word of Allah should be the uppermost then he
is in the way of Allah, exalted is He.”7
An example of the latter, which is distinguishing between the
different degrees of worship, is someone who prays four rak’ats
6 I’tikaf is retreat within the mosque in the last ten days of Ramadan.
Similarly, sitting having prayed the sunnah prayers and waiting for the
obligatory prayer is an act of worship.
7 Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated it.
1100

--- Page 25 ---


--- Section 7 ---
1. Intention
by which he could intend the midday prayer or sunnah prayers,8
and that which distinguishes these two is the intention. Similarly,
freeing a slave can be intended as an expiation for a wrong action
and for other purposes such as [expiation of] vows [which have
been broken] etc., and here that which distinguishes them is the
intention.
Respecting his words @ “There is only for each man that
which he intends”, there is an indication that it is not permitted
to deputise for someone else in acts of worship nor appoint
someone as an agent from the same intention. The exceptions in
this case are distribution of zakah and sacrifice of an ‘Eid animal,
for appointing someone as an agent is permissible in both these
cases in the intention, and to slaughter [an animal for ‘Eid] and
to distribute [the zakah] along with the capability to make the
intention. In the Hajj it is not permitted [to appoint someone to
go in one’s place] if one has the capability [of doing it oneself].
Paying a debt: as for when it is for one purpose it does not need an
intention. But if it is for two purposes such as someone who owes
two thousands, one of which is for something he has pawned,
and he pays a thousand and says “I have paid it for the pawned
item,” then he is right. If he did not intend anything at the time
he paid he may form and declare the intention after that and
make it for whatever he wishes [i.e. to pay for the pawned item or
just as a payment for his debt. It assumes that both debts are to
the same person.] There is no other intention which we can delay
until after the action and yet it remains sound except here.
His saying @ “Whoever’s emigration is for Allah and His
Messenger then his emigration is for Allah and His Messenger.
Whoever’s emigration is for some worldly gain which he can
acquire or a woman he will marry then his emigration is for
that for which he emigrated”: the root of ‘emigration’ is ‘flight’
and ‘abandoning’. The term ‘Hijrah’ is used for a number of
matters:
First, the emigration of the Companions ô from Makkah
8 Hanafis permit four rak’ats without a tasleem after the second rak’ah as a
sunnah prayer.
1100 11

--- Page 26 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
to Abyssinia when those who associated partners with Allah
were harming the Messenger of Allah @ so they fled from it
to the Negus. This was five years after the sending [of the
Messenger @], al-Bayhaqi said.
The second emigration was from Makkah to Madinah, and
it was thirteen years after the sending [of the Prophet @]. It
was obligatory on every Muslim in Makkah to emigrate to
the Messenger of Allah @ in Madinah. A group said without
qualification that emigration was obligatory from Makkah to
Madinah, however this is not the unqualified case, since there
is no particular virtue in Madinah, and what was obligatory
was the emigration to the Messenger of Allah @.
[Qadi Abu Bakr] Ibn al-‘Arabi said, “The people of knowledge
ô divided travel in the earth into flight and search, and the
former sub-divides into six sub-divisions:
“First, going out from the abode of war to the abode of
Islam, and this remains until the Day of Rising. That which
ceased with the Opening [of Makkah to Islam] according to
his words @ ‘There is no emigration after the Opening’,9 was
the emigration to the Messenger of Allah @ where he was.
“Second, leaving the people of innovation. Ibn al-Qasim
said, ‘I heard Malik say, “It is not permitted for anyone to
remain in a land in which the first community are being
cursed.”10’
“Third, leaving a land where the haram is predominant,
since it is obligatory on every Muslim to seek the halal.
“Fourth, fleeing from harm to one’s body. It is one of the
bounties of Allah that He makes an allowance for that. If
someone fears for himself in a place then Allah permits him
to leave it, and fleeing with oneself will save one from that
peril. The first to do that was Ibrahim ï when he feared his
people and said, ‘I am leaving this place to follow the pleasure of
9 Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated it.
10 Extremist shi’ahs such as the Fatimids used to pronounce curses on some
of the Companions.
1122

--- Page 27 ---


--- Section 8 ---
1. Intention
my Lord.’11 He, exalted is He, says, telling of Musa ï ‘So he left
there fearful and on his guard.’12
“Fifth, leaving unhealthy cities from fear of illness to go to
a healthy land. He @ permitted those suffering from a disease
called ‘aran,13 when they found Madinah bad for their health,
to leave and go to pasture-land.
“Sixth, leaving from fear of financial harm, since the sanctity
of a Muslim’s wealth is the same as the sanctity of his blood.
“As for the division of [travelling in] search, it sub-divides into
ten sub-divisions [under two main headings]: seeking the deen
and seeking the world. Seeking the deen has nine types:
“First, travelling for reflection; Allah, exalted is He,
says, ‘Have they not travelled in the earth and seen the final fate
of those before them?’14 Indeed, Dhu’l-Qarnayn travelled
around in the world in order to see its wonders.
“Second, the journey for Hajj.
“Third, the journey for Jihad.
“Fourth, the journey for livelihood.
“Fifth, the journey for trade and extra earning over
and above one’s food, which is permissible because of
His words, exalted is He, ‘There is nothing wrong in seeking
bounty from your Lord.’15
“Sixth, seeking knowledge.
“Seventh, intending to visit honoured places; he said
@ ‘Strenuous journeys are not undertaken except to
three mosques.’16
“Eighth, intending to go to the frontiers for ribat.17
11 Surat al-‘Ankabut: 29.
12 Surat al-Qasas: 20.
13 Pustules or possibly cracking and chapping of the skin, the former more
commonly arising among camels and the latter among horses.
14 Surat ar-Rum: 9.
15 Surat al-Baqarah: 198.
16 Al-Bukhari and Muslim narrated it.
17 Manning ribat fortresses on the frontiers in defence of the Muslims, and
there training for war, practising dhikr of Allah and studying the deen. Said
by some to be superior even to jihad since ribat is striving to defend the lives,
1122 13

--- Page 28 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
“Ninth, visiting one’s brothers for the sake of Allah,
exalted is He. He said @ ‘A man visited a brother of
his in a town, and so Allah sent an angel in his path
who said to him, “Where do you intend [to go]?” He
said, “I am going to see a brother of mine in this town.”
He said, “Do you owe him any favour which you must
repay him?” He said, “No, it is only that I love him for
the sake of Allah, exalted is He.” He said, “Then I am
the messenger of Allah to you [with the message] that
Allah loves you just as you love him”.’ Muslim and others
narrated it.” [This is the end of what Qadi Abu Bakr ibn
al-‘Arabi said.]
[Continuing the list of types of hijrah:]
Third, the emigration of the tribes to the Messenger of
Allah @ in order to learn the laws of the shari’ah and then
return to their people and teach them.
Fourth, the emigration of one of the people of Makkah,
who became a Muslim, in order to come to the Prophet @ and
then return to his people.
Fifth, the emigration from the countries of kufr to the
countries of Islam for it is not desirable for a Muslim to reside
in the abode of kufr. Al-Mawardi said, “If he acquires family
and relatives, and it is possible for him to perform his deen
openly then it is not permissible for him to emigrate, since the
place in which he is has become for him an abode of Islam.”
Sixth, the Muslim’s forsaking (hijrah) his brother for more than
three days without a reason in the shari’ah, which is disapproved
of during the three days and haram every day beyond them,
unless because of an over-riding necessity. It has been told as a
story that a man forsook his brother for more than three days,
so he [his brother] wrote these verses of poetry to him:
“O my master, you have done me an injustice,
so seek from Ibn Abi Khaythamah a judgement about it,
because he narrates from his grandfather
property and honour of the Muslims whereas jihad is striving to spill the blood
of the kafirun.
1144

--- Page 29 ---


--- Section 9 ---
1. Intention
that which ad-Dahhak narrated from ‘Ikrimah,
from Ibn ‘Abbas from the Chosen One,
our Prophet who was sent with mercy,
that a close friend’s turning away from his close friend
for more than three days, our Lord has forbidden.”
Seventh, the husband’s forsaking his wife if her disobedience
is a fact. He said, exalted is He, “refuse to sleep with them (lit.:
forsake them in the beds).”18 Of that [too] is forsaking (hijrah)
disobedient people in place, in speech, in returning the
greeting and in opening with a greeting.
Eighth, the forsaking of everything which Allah has
forbidden and it is the most general and universal type of
hijrah.
His saying @ “So whoever’s emigration is for Allah and His
Messenger” i.e. in intention and purpose “then his emigration is
for Allah and His Messenger” in judgement and in shari’ah.
“Whoever’s emigration is for some worldly gain which he can
acquire…”. They transmit that a man emigrated from Makkah
to Madinah not wishing by that the excellence of emigration,
but only emigrating in order to marry a woman called Umm
Qays, and so he was called the Emigrant for the sake of Umm
Qays. If someone says that marriage is one of the things sought
of people in the shari’ah so why is it [here counted as] one of the
requirements of the world? Then the answer is, “Outwardly he
didn’t emigrate for her sake but for the sake of performing hijrah,
so that when [that which] he concealed [was] the opposite of
what he made known to people then he was worthy of reproach
and blame.” Analogous to that is someone who goes out with the
apparent intention of performing the Hajj but really intends to
go for trade.19 Similar [to that is] someone who travels to seek
knowledge and his purpose in that is to obtain leadership or a
18 Surat an-Nisa: 34.
19 Trade at Mina during Hajj after ‘Arafat is permissible by the specific
ayah of Qur’an “There is nothing wrong in seeking bounty from your Lord” (Surat
al-Baqarah: 198) which occurs in the midst of the ayat on Hajj, but the intention
of going on Hajj must have been for the Hajj and not t he trade.
1144 15

--- Page 30 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
governorship.
From his saying @ “Then his emigration is for that for which
he emigrated,” it necessarily follows that there is no reward for
someone whose purpose in the Hajj is trade and for visiting.
The hadith has to be interpreted that if the thing which set him
moving and sent him to the Hajj was only the trade [then he
has no reward], but if the thing which sent him was [the desire
to perform] the Hajj then he will have the reward and [he will
have] the trade consequent to it, except that he will have a lesser
reward than someone who brought himself out for the Hajj
[alone]. If the thing which sent him out on the Hajj was both of
them then it is conceivable that he will obtain the reward, since
his travel was not set in motion for the sake of the world, but the
opposite is also conceivable (i.e. that he has no reward), since he
mixed an action for the next life with an action for the world.
However, the hadith grades the judgement according to the
purpose purely, and so it is not true that someone who intended
both of them (the next life and the world) only intended the
world, and Allah i knows best.
16

--- Page 31 ---
16

--- Page 32 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
1188

--- Page 33 ---


--- Section 10 ---
2. Islam, Iman and Ihsan
2: The Hadith of Jibril
on Islam, Iman and Ihsan
Umar î also said, “One day while we were sitting with
the Messenger of Allah @ a man came up to us whose
clothes were extremely white, whose hair was extremely
black, upon whom traces of travelling could not be seen, and
whom none of us knew, until he sat down close to the Prophet
@ so that he rested his knees upon his knees and placed his two
hands upon his thighs and said, ‘Muhammad, tell me about
Islam.’ The Messenger of Allah @ said, ‘Islam is that you witness
that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah, and establish the prayer, and give the zakah,
and fast Ramadan, and perform the Hajj of the House if you are
able to take a way to it.’ He said, ‘You have told the truth,’ and
we were amazed at him asking him and [then] telling him that
he told the truth. He said, ‘Tell me about iman.’ He said, ‘That
you believe in Allah, His angels, His books, His messengers,
and the Last Day, and that you believe in the Decree, the good
of it and the bad of it.’ He said, ‘You have told the truth.’ He
said, ‘Tell me about ihsan.’ He said, ‘That you worship Allah
as if you see Him, for if you don’t see Him then truly He sees
you.’ He said, ‘Tell me about the Hour.’ He said, ‘The one asked
about it knows no more than the one asking.’ He said, ‘Then
tell me about its signs.’ He said, ‘That the female slave should
give birth to her mistress, and you see poor, naked, barefoot
shepherds of sheep and goats competing in raising buildings.’
He went away, and I remained some time. Then he said, ‘Umar,
do you know who the questioner was?’ I said, ‘Allah and His
Messenger know best.’ He said, ‘He was Jibril who came to you
to teach you your deen’.” Muslim narrated it.
1188 19

--- Page 34 ---
The Complete Forty Hadith
Commentary
His saying ï “Tell me about iman.” Linguistically, iman is
unqualified ‘affirmation’, and in the shari’ah it is an expression
denoting a particular affirmation, which is affirmation of
Allah, His angels, His books, His messengers, the Last Day, and
the Decree, the good and the bad of it. As for Islam, it is an
expression denoting the performance of the obligatory duties,
and it is compliance with [performance of] outward action.
Allah, exalted is He, [in Qur’an] contrasts Islam and iman as
in the hadith: Allah, exalted is He, says, “The desert Arabs say,
‘We have iman.’ Say: ‘You do not have iman. Say rather, “We have
become Muslim”.’”1 That is because the hypocrites used to pray,
fast and give sadaqah (i.e. the zakah) while yet denying it in
their hearts, so that when they claimed iman, Allah, exalted is
He, denied their claim of iman because of their hearts’ denial,
and He affirmed their claim of Islam because of their practice
of it. Allah, exalted is He, says, “When the hypocrites come to you
…” up until His words, exalted is He, “…and Allah bears witness
that the hypocrites are certainly liars,”2 i.e. [they are liars] in their
claiming to bear witness to the message while their hearts are
opposed, because their tongues do not agree with their hearts,
and the pre-condition of witnessing to the message is that the
tongue and the heart should be in agreement. Since iman is
a pre-condition for the soundness of Islam, Allah singled the
Muslims out from the mu’minun. Allah, exalted is He, says, “We
brought out all the mu’minun who were there but found in it only one
house of Muslims.”3 This is a homogeneous exception4 because of
1 Surat al-Hujurat: 14.

